

Languages and Communities
## IN
## Early Modern Europe

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2019 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation
https://archive.org/details/languagescommuniOOOOburk





## LANGUAGES AND COMMUNITIES IN
## EARLY MODERN EUROPE
In this magisterial new study, Peter Burke explores the social and
cultural history of the languages spoken or written in Europe between
the invention of printing and the French Revolution, arguing that,
from a linguistic point of view, 1450 to 1789 should be regarded as a
distinct period.
One major theme of the book is the relation between languages and
communities (regions, churches, occupations and genders, as well as
nations) and the place of language as a way of identifying others,
as well as a symbol of one’s own identity. A second, linked theme
is that of competition: between Latin and the vernaculars, between
different vernaculars, dominant and subordinate, and finally between
different varieties of the same vernacular, such as standard languages
and dialects.
Written by one of Europe’s leading cultural historians, this book
replaces the history of the many languages of Europe in a large variety
of contexts.
peter burke is Professor of Cultural History and a Fellow of
Emmanuel College, University of Cambridge. He has published over
twenty books, which have been translated into over thirty languages.



The 2002 Wiles Lectures given at Queens University, Belfast
## LANGUAGES AND COMMUNITIES IN
## EARLY MODERN EUROPE
## PETER BURKE
ttaia Library
iiyfRSVT t
tor* * -v
i homo*
## Tun „
p|rER60^‘-^^,c '
## Cambridge
## UNIVERSITY PRESS

V qp. ^
## PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
## The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom
## CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge, cbz zru, UK
40 West 20th Street, New York, ny iooii—4211, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, vie 3207, Australia
Ruiz de Alarcdn 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
## Dock House, The Waterfront, Cape Town 8001, South Africa
http://www.cambridge.org
## © Peter Burke 2004
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2004
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
Typeface Adobe Garamond 11/12.5 pt. System 2g Tb]
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
## Burke, Peter.
Languages and communities in early modern Europe / by Peter Burke,
p. cm. - (The Wiles lectures given at the Queen s University, Belfast)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn o 521 82896 1 - isbn o 521 53586 7 (pbk.)
- Sociolinguistics — Europe — History. I. Title. II. Wiles lectures.
## P40.45.E85B87 2004
3o6-44'o94 - dc22 2004045499
isbn o 521 82896 1 hardback
isbn o 521 53586 7 paperback

## PARA
## MARIA LUCIA



## Contents
Acknowledgements page viii
Chronology 1450-1794 x
Prologue: communities and domains 1
1 ‘Speak, that I may see thee’: the discovery of language in early
modern Europe 15
2 Latin: a language in search of a community 43
3 Vernaculars in competition 61
4 Standardizing languages 89
5 Mixing languages in
6 Purifying languages 141
Epilogue: languages and nations 160
Appendix: languages in Europe 1450-1789 173
## Bibliography 176
## Index 2,00
vii

## Acknowledgements
In the first place, my thanks are due to the Wiles Trust and the Department
of History, Queen’s University Belfast, for the invitation to deliver the Wiles
Lectures for 2002 and for their hospitality during my time in Belfast. Peter
Jupp in particular went out of his way to make me feel at home during that
memorable week.
The Wiles Trust generously allow their lecturers to invite eight guests
who participate in the often lively seminars that follow each of the public
sessions. I am grateful to my eight interlocutors for pertinent questions,
observations and references: to Robert Evans, Felipe Fernandez-Armesto,
## Angel Gurria Quintana, Steve Milner, Robert Muchembled, Jens Rahbeck
Rasmussen, Herman Roodenburg and Robert St George. Ian Kershaw also
made a memorable contribution to the discussions.
Other friends and colleagues have offered much-appreciated assistance.
Mark Phillips suggested that I add the chapter on ‘discovery’. Xavier Gil,
Gyorgy Gomori, Richard Helgerson, Liesbeth van Houts, Simon Keynes,
Berthold Kress, Metin Kunt, David Wallace, Kit Woolard and Ghil’ad
Zuckermann all offered comments or references which I have tried to
take into account. Xavier also gave me books about Catalan that were
difficult to obtain in England and allowed me to read his unpublished
essay: ‘Political and Apolitical Uses ol Language in Early Modern Spain’.
Alessandra Mantovani sent me her edition of Pontano on language at the
very moment I most needed it. Hanne Sanders sent me books about Skane
in the seventeenth century, while Harold Gustafsson allowed me to read
and use an unpublished chapter of his on the same subject. Participants
in my Cambridge seminars on the social history of language, including
two colleagues from the neighbouring Faculty of Modern and Medieval
Languages, Wendy Bennett and Virginia Cox, offered some stimulating
ideas.
1 am also grateful to the audiences who discussed chapters of this book
presented as lectures in Bastad, Budapest, Canterbury, Dublin, Heidelberg,
viii

Acknowledgements ix
Helsinki, London, Oxford, Santa Barbara and Vienna, as well as to my hosts
on all these pleasant occasions.
Looking further back, it is impossible not to mention the late and much
lamented Roy Porter, with whom I collaborated on three volumes of essays
on language and who should have been around to comment on this one
in his inimitable way. Still further back, I think of my father, a sometime
professional translator, whose boast it was that he had been introduced at
a party as ‘the man who had forgotten twenty languages’. I suppose that I
have been trying to emulate him all this time without realizing it.
Returning to the present and the future, I dedicate this book to my wife,
Maria Lucia, with whom I began the adventure of introducing a foreign
language into everyday life.

## Chronology 1450—1794
## 1461
first printed book in German
## 00

so

first printed book in Czech
## 1471
first printed book in Italian
## 1474
first printed book in English
## 1474
first printed book in Catalan
c. 1476
first printed book in French
## 1477
first printed book in Flemish
## 1483
first printed book in Croat
## 00

first printed book in Church Slavonic
c.1483
first printed book in Spanish
## 1489
first printed book in Portuguese
## 1492
Nebrija, Gramatica castellana (the first printed grammar of a
vernacular)
## 1495
first printed book in Danish
## 1495
first printed book in Swedish
1499 first printed book in Breton
## 1501
first printed book in Provencal
## 1515
Castellesi, De sermone latino
1522 first printed book in Polish
## 1522-34 Luther’s Bible
## 1525
Bembo, Prose della vulgar lingua
## 1525
first printed book in Latvian
1526 first printed book in post-classical Greek
## 1527
first printed book in Hungarian
## 1529
Amaseo, De latinae linguae usu retinendo
## 1529
Dante, De vulgari eloquentia, published
## 1529 Trissino, Poetica
## 1529
lory, Champfleury
## 1530
Palsgrave, Lesclaircissement de la langue francoyse
## 1532
Welsh forbidden in court
## X

## 1533
## 1534
## 1535
## 1535
## 1536
## 1537
## 1539
## 1539
## 1539
## 1540
## 1540
## 1540
## 1541
## 1542-
## 1544
## 1545
## 1546
## 1546
## 1547
## 1549
## 1550
## 1550
i55i
## 1553
## 1554
## 1555
## 1557
## 1557
## 1560
## 1563
## 1565
## 1566
## 1567
## 1567
## 1567
## 1568
## 1570
## 1574
## 1578
## 1579
Chronology xi
Optat, Grammatika ceska
## Ickelsamer, Teutsche Grammatica
first printed book in Estonian
first printed book in Yiddish
Oliveira, Grammatica de linguagem portuguesa
‘Act of the English Order, Habit and Language’ in Ireland
Edict of Villers-Cotterets
Polish Sejm ruled that laws and edicts should be in Polish
## Sylvester, Grammatica Hungarolatina
Barros, Louvor de nossa linguagem
Dolet, La ponctuation de la langue franc;aise
first printed book in Icelandic
## Swedish Bible
Speroni, Dialogo della lingua
first printed book in Romanian
first printed book in Basque
Tolomei, II Cesano
first printed book in Welsh
first printed book in Lithuanian
Du Bellay, Deffense et illustration de la langue frangoyse
L. Meigret, Trette de la grammaire frangoeze
## Danish Bible
first printed book in Slovene
Werve, Tresoor der Duitsche Tale
Perion, De linguaegallicae origine
first printed book in Albanian
first printed book in Romansh
R. Estienne, Grammaire frangais
French replaced Latin in courts of Savoy
Polish Bible (Protestant)
first printed book in Gascon
first printed book in Bulgarian
first printed book in Scottish Gaelic
Pragmatic of Philip II against use of Arabic
first printed book in Irish
Statorius, Polonicae grammatices institutio
## Varchi, Ercolano
Viziana, Alabama as de las lenguas . . . Castellana y Valenciana
Estienne, Deux dialogues
Estienne, Precedence de la langue frangaise

xii
## 1579-
## 1579
## 1581
## 1582
## 1583
## 1584
## 1584
## 1585
## 1588
## 1588
## 1589
## 1590
## 1592
## 1596
## 1600
## 1604
## 1604
## 1606
## 1606
## 1608
## 1611
## 1612-
## 1612
## 1615
## 1617
## 1619
## 1625
## 1626
## 1635
## 1637
## 1638
## 1641
## 1641
## 1642
## 1642
## 1643
## 1644
## 1646
## Chronology
## Kralice Bible
Czech reaffirmed as the language of courts in Bohemia
Fauchet, Origine de la langue frangaise
Stevin, Weerdigheyt der duytsche tael
Accademia della Crusca founded
Bohoric, Arcticae Horulae (Slovene grammar)
## Spieghel, Nederduitsche Letterkunst
Morales, Discurso sohre la lengua castellana
## Geneva Bible
## Welsh Bible
Rybinski, De lingua polonica praestantia
## Hungarian Bible
Rhys, Welsh grammar
Zizanij, Gramatika slovenska
Cittadini, Formazione della lingua toscana
Aldrete, Del origeny principio de la Lengua castellana
Kasic, Institutiones linguae illyricae
Biffi, Prissian da Milan
Nunes de Leao, Origem da lingua portuguesa
Estates of Bohemia declared Czech to be the official language
## Authorized Version
Vocabolario della Crusca
## Beni, Anticrusca
Carew, On the Excellency of the English Tongue
Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft founded
Smotrickii, Grammatiki slavenskija syntagma
first printed book in Russian
Banchieri, Discorso della lingua Bolognese
foundation of Academie Franchise
## Dutch States’ Bible
St-Evremond, Comedie des academistes
sermons in Castillian prohibited in Catalonia (after revolt)
governor-general’s edict that slaves could only wear hats and
caps if they could speak Dutch
## Finnish Bible
Rist, Rettung der edlen Teutschen
Stiernhielm, Gambia svea
Rehehusen, Manuductio ad linguam lettonicam
Pontoppidan, Grammatica danica

i647
## 1649
## 1649
## 1651
## 1651
## 1653
## 1659
## 1660
## 1662
## 1663
## 1670
## 1674
## 1677
## 1678
## 1684
## 1685
## 1687
## 1693
## 1694
## 1694
## 1696
## 1696
## 1700
## 1707
## 1708
## 1713
## 1716
## 1726-39
## 1729
## 1734
## 1735
## 1743
## 1751
## 1755
## 1755
## 1757
Chronology xiii
Vaugelas, Remarques sur la langue frangaise
first printed book in Sami
Lingua finnica institutio
Jonas, Grammatica islandica
Dupleix, Liberte de la langue frangaise
## Klein, Grammatica Lituanica
Maunoir, Breton grammar
Gosekenius, Manuductio ad linguam Oesthonicam
‘Partenio Tosco’, Eccellenza della lingua napoletana
Schottel, Lob der Teutschen Haubtsprache
Balbin, Dissertatio apologetica pro lingua slavonica praecipue
bohemica (written)
Ray, Collection of English Words
Rudbeck began lecturing in Swedish
Karl XI ordered the former Danish provinces to use Swedish
French used in court in Flanders
French the administrative language of Alsace
Thomasius announced lectures in German
Callieres, Mots a la mode
Dictionnaire de lAcademie Frangaise
Sperling, De danicae linguae antiqua gloria
Polish the sole administrative language of the
## Commonwealth
Ludolf, Grammatica russica
first printed book in Cornish
first printed book in Manx
reform of Russian alphabet
Real Academia Espanola founded
Egenolff, Histone der Teutschen Sprache
Spanish Academy, Diccionario de la lengua castellana
first printed book in Turkish
chair in Italian eloquence founded at Turin
Trediakovsky, speech in praise of Russian
Richey, Ldioticon hamburgense
Ribinyi, De cultura linguae hungaricae
Johnson, A Dictionary of the English Language
## Lomonosov, Russian Grammar
Trediakovsky, O pervenstve slovenskago yazyka pred
teutonicheskim (written)

xiv
## Chronology
## 1757
## 1767
## 1768
## 1779
## 1783
## 1784
## 1784
## 1786
## 1786
## 1789-94
## 1790
## 1792
## 1793
## 1793
## 1794
Portuguese made official language in Brazil
Russian declared the language of instruction at Moscow
## University
Charles III required Castilian in administration and
education
Galiani, Del dialetto napoletano
Russian Academy founded
German made official language in Habsburg Empire
Rivarol, Discours sur I’universalite de la langue franca is e
Swedish Academy founded
Linguarum totius orbis vocabularia
## Russian Academy’s Russian Dictionary
Joseph II revoked decree of 1784
Dobrovsky, Geschichte der bohmischen sprache
Chair of Czech founded at Prague University
J. Vargas y Ponce, Declamacion contra los abusos introducidos
en el castellano
## Gregoire, Rapport

Prologue: communities and domains
The principal aim of this book is to reflect on the changing relations between
language and community, or, more exactly, between languages and commu¬
nities in the plural, in Europe and other areas in which European languages
were spoken, from the invention of printing to the French Revolution. This
is not a general survey of the history of the languages of Europe in the early
modern period so much as a series of linked essays (originally lectures) on
a few major strands in that history.
Today, language is a topical subject. Indeed, the year 2001 was officially
declared the ‘European Year of Language’. There should be little need to
remind anyone of the links between language and politics, or, better, the
entanglement of language with politics at a time when phrases such as
‘language rights’ and ‘identity politics’ have recently entered our everyday
speech. At a time of involvement, this book makes an attempt at detachment
or distanciation, reculer pour mieux sauter.
Why should a cultural historian write about language? Why not leave
the topic to the linguists? For one thing, because language is always a sensi¬
tive indicator - though not a simple reflection — of cultural change. In this
respect, the history of linguistic borrowings (below, pp. niff.) is suggestive.
What English borrowed from Italian in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen¬
turies, especially artistic terms such as aria, chiaroscuro, fresco and piazza,
tells us something about both cultures, about Italian leadership in the arts
and about English interest in catching up. In similar fashion, eighteenth-
century French borrowings from English, notably political terms such as
‘budget’, ‘club’, ‘jury’, ‘pamphlet’ and ‘vote’, point to differences between
the two political cultures and also to a movement of Anglophilia in
## France.
This book might be described as an essay in the ‘cultural history of
language’, at a time when all history seems to be becoming cultural his¬
tory. Some linguists speak of ‘language culture’ (especially in German,
## 1

## 2
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Sprachkultur), to refer to a complex or system of attitudes to language and
images of languages to be found in a given place and time.1
## THE SOCIAL HISTORY OF LANGUAGE
The question a sociologist or a social historian wants to ask at this point
is, of course, whose culture? A similar point may be made about studies of
language consciousness, Sprachbewusstsein. Whose consciousness?
To sum up the last two hundred years of language studies in a simple
formula, the famous historical turn of the nineteenth century has been
followed by the structural and social turns of the mid-twentieth century,
and more recently by the socio-historical turn of the 1980s and 1990s.
Nineteenth-century historians tended to focus on national unity and
to write about the ‘evolution’ or the ‘growth’ of a given language as if it
were a plant or animal, without concerning themselves over-much with
social variation. By contrast, the advances in the social analysis of lan¬
guage made in the 1950s and 1960s were accompanied by a turning away
from history. Individual sociolinguists or sociologists of language, includ¬
ing Robert Hall, Dell Hymes and Joshua Fishman, retained an interest in
history. Fishman, for instance, was trained as a historian and has contin¬
ued to draw on historical material.2 3 Perhaps the best example to date of a
serious attempt to combine a linguistic, a social and a historical analysis
dates from this time, the Neapolitan Tullio De Mauro’s Linguistic History
of United Italy? All the same, the thrust of the sociolinguistic approach was
away from history, a trend that was due in part to the influence of struc¬
turalism and in part to the ethnographic emphasis on fieldwork in small
communities.
More recently, a return to history has become visible, notably in stud¬
ies of pidgins, creoles and mixed languages (p. hi).4 More generally, one
might even speak of the emergence, or invention, of a new field, which
linguists have variously christened ‘socio-historical linguistics’, ‘historical
sociolinguistics’ — something of a mouthful — or, more simply, historical
1 Richard W. Bailey, Images of English: a Cultural History of the Language (Ann Arbor, 1991); Harald
Weinrich, Wege der Sprachkultur {Stuttgart, 1985); Erich Scrassner, Deutsche Sprachkultur (Tubingen,
1995). The term goes back to the linguists of the Prague Circle in the early 1930s.
2 Joshua A. Fishman, Language in Sociocultural Change (New York, 197a), pp. xi-xii.
3 Tullio De Mauro, Storia linguistica dell'Italia unita (1963: revised ed., Rome, 1991).
4 Michael Richter, towards a Methodology of Historical Sociolinguistics’ (1985: repr. Richter, Studies
in Medieval Language and Culture, Dublin, 1995), pp. 132-47; Peter Bakker and Maarten Mous (eds.),
Mixed Languages (Amsterdam, 1994).

Prologue: communities and domains 3
pragmatics’ (a Journal of Historical Pragmatics was founded in the year
## 2000).5
My own preference, like that of some other historians and linguists, is for
the ‘social history of language’.6 This phrase has the advantage of bringing
the social functions of language into the open, leading on to a discussion
of the place of language in expressing or constructing a variety of social
relationships - dominance and subordination, friendship and fraternity,
tolerance and prejudice, the maintenance and the subversion of a social
order, and so on.
Whatever one calls this field, there is little doubt that it is growing
fast. That the Regius Professor of Modern History at the University of
Oxford should have devoted his inaugural lecture to the subject, in 1998,
is an indicator of change.7 Research groups in the field include one at the
University College of Aberystwyth studying the social history of Welsh,
another at the University of Helsinki working on ‘Sociolinguistics and
Language History’, a third at the Free University of Berlin concerned with
the ‘Historical Anthropology of Language’, and a fourth at the University
of Lund focused on the ‘History of the Modern Swedish Language in the
Light of Social Change’. Work on the social history of language is also
going on at the Vrije Universiteit in Brussels, at the Meertens Institute in
Amsterdam, at the University of Campinas in Brazil, and doubtless in other
countries as well.
The ‘social history of language’ may be a relatively new programme but,
as is usually the case, the programme does not so much initiate the practice
as follow it. An important contribution was made by an international com¬
munity of linguists in classic studies published in the first half of the twenti¬
eth century, including Ferdinand Brunot on French, Christine Mohrmann
and Josef Schrijnen on the Latin of the early Church, Peter Skautrup on
Danish, Vladimir Vinogradov on Russian, and a French scholar who died
young, Antoine Martel, on the conflict of languages in Ruthenia in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.8
s Suzanne Romaine, Socio-historical Linguistics (Cambridge, 1982); Klaus J. Mattheier, ‘National-
sprachentwicklung, Sprachenstandardisierung und historische Soziolinguistik’, Sociolinguistica 2
(1988), pp. 1-9; Ernst H. Jahr (ed.), Language Change: Advances in Historical Sociolinguistics (Berlin,
## 1999)-
6 David Leith, A Social History of English (1983: second ed., London, 1997); Joey L. Dillard, Toward a
Social History of American English (Berlin, 1985); Peter Burke and Roy Porter (eds.), The Social History
of Language (Cambridge, 1987).
7 Robert J. W. Evans, The Language of History and the History of Language (Oxford, 1998).
® Ferdinand Brunot, Histoire de la langue frangaise, 12 vols. (Paris, 1905); Christine Mohrmann,
Die altchristliche Sondersprache in den Sermones des hi. Augustin (Nijmegen, 1932); Josef Schrijnen,

## 4
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Literary scholars have also been writing about the history of language
for generations. Among them, the outstanding figure is surely the Russian
Mikhail Bakhtin, whose study of Rabelais, begun in the 1930s but pub¬
lished only in 1965, led him to the study of what he called polyglossia’ (the
interaction between languages, such as Latin and Italian), and ’heteroglos-
sia' (the interaction between different forms of the same language). Bakhtin
criticized the linguists of his time for paying insufficient attention to social
factors.9
Historians too have been making occasional contributions to language
studies lor some time. A major study published in 1975 by the French poly¬
math Michel de Certeau, together with two historians, under the arresting
and topical title, Unepolitique de la langue, was concerned with the relation
between the French Revolution and the dialects of France, lespatois}0 I his
politics ol language’ approach has inspired a long series of later studies of the
relations between the French language and the French Revolution (below,
p. 165), revealing an interest that was doubtless inspired by contemporary
language conflicts in France, Canada and elsewhere.11
Earlier studies by historians are not numerous but they include the work
of some distinguished scholars, from Lucien Febvre to Americo Castro and
Vivian Galbraith, and they deal with a range of topics, such as the language
of the law, language and nationality, language and empire, and the language
of diplomacy (the subject of two early articles, both in Swedish).12
Charakteristik des altchristlichen Latein (Nijmegen, 1932); Peter Skautrup, Det danske sprogs historic,
5 vols. (Copenhagen, 1944-70); Vladimir V. Vinogradov, The History of the Russian Literary
Language from the Seventeenth Century to the Nineteenth (1949: condensed adaptation, Madison,
1969); Antoine Martel, La langue polonaise dans les pays Ruthenes: Ukraine et Russie-Blanche,
1569—1667 (Lille, 1938).
9 Mikhail M. Bakhtin [‘V. S. Voloshinov’] Marxism and the Philosophy of Language (1929: English
trans. New York, 1973); Bakhtin, Rabelais and his World (1965: English translation, Cambridge, MA,
1971); Erich Auerbach, Literary Language and its Public (1958: English translation, London, 1965);
Paul Teyssier, La langue de Gil Vicente (Paris, 1959).
10 Michel de Certeau, Jacques Revel and Dominique Julia, Une Politique de la langue: la Revolution
Franfaise et les patois (Paris, 1975).
11 Jean-Yves Lartichaux, ‘Linguistic Politics during the French Revolution', Diogenes 97 (1977),
pp. 65-84; Patrice Higonnet, ‘The Politics of Linguistic Terrorism’, Social History 5 (1980), pp. 41-
69; Martyn Lyons, ‘Politics and Patois: the Linguistic Policy of the French Revolution’, Australian
Journal of French Studies (1981), pp. 264-81; Lorenzo Renzi, La politico linguistica dellt rivoluzione
francese (Naples, 1981); Lynn Hunt, Politics, Culture and Class in the French Revolution (Berkeley,
1984), pp. 19-51; Henri Boyer and Philippe Gardy (eds.), La question linguistique au sud au moment
de la Revolution Franfaise (Montpellier, 1985) [special issue, no. 17, of Lengas]; Peter Flaherty, ‘The
Politics of Linguistic Uniformity during the French Revolution’, Historical Reflections 14 (1987),
pp. 311-28; David A. Bell, Lingua Populi, Lingua Dei: Language, Religion and the Origins of
French Revolutionary Nationalism’, American Historical Review 100 (1995), pp. 1403-37.
12 F. Wcstrin, ‘Nigra iakttagelser angiende franskan sSsom diplomatiens sprik’, Historisk Tidskrift 20
(1900), pp. 329-40; L.ucien Febvre, ‘Politique royale ou civilisation franfaise? Remarques sur un

Prologue: communities and domains
## 5
## THE PROBLEM OF COMMUNITY
As the general title of the book suggests, the following pages will focus on the
relation between languages and communities. ‘Community’ is at once an
indispensable term and a dangerous one, whether we are practising history
or sociology or simply living our everyday lives. In this respect, it is rather
like the term ‘identity’, or indeed the word ‘culture’. Sociolinguists would
certainly find it difficult to do without the phrase ‘speech community’, or
Sprachgemeinschafi, a term which came into use in German in the 1920s
before spreading to English and other languages. The term is used to refer
to the group - which may be as large as France or as small as a family —
in which a particular language or variety of language is understood, a
‘community of interpretation’ as some literary critics call it.13 The use of a
particular variety of language expresses, maintains and even helps to create
solidarity between the members of the group.
The danger of using the term ‘community’, again like ‘culture’, is that it
seems to imply a homogeneity, a boundary and a consensus that are simply
not to be found when one engages in research at ground level, whether this
‘fieldwork’ is historical, sociological or anthropological. So far as homogene¬
ity is concerned, one of the main points to be made in this book concerns
the variety of ways in which different social groups used the ‘same’ language.
Again, the term ‘community’ seems to imply a sharp boundary between
insiders and outsiders, whereas in practice the frontiers between languages
are often vague, not so much lines as zones of bilingualism and language
mixing. As for consensus, linguistic norms not infrequently hide conflicts
and the dominance of one group over others.14
All the same, the term ‘community’ will recur again and again in this
book. The point is not to deny linguistic, cultural or social conflicts, which
will also recur in these pages, but to note that collective solidarities and
identities are also a part of everyday life. To make the point in a linguistic
probl£me d’histoire linguistique’, Revue desynthese historique 38 (1924), pp. 37—53; Febvre, Langue et
nationality en France au i8e si£cle’, Revue desynthese historique42 (1926), pp. 19-40; Am<§rico Castro,
Lapeculiaridadlinguistica rioplatensey su sentido historico (Buenos Aires, 1941); Vivian H. Galbraith,
‘Language and Nationality in Medieval England’, Transactions ofthe Royal Historical Society 23 (1941),
pp. 113-28; Nils Ahnlund, ‘Diplomatiens sprak i Sverige’, in his Svenskt och Nordiskt (Stockholm,
1943), pp. 114-22; George. E. Woodbine, ‘The Language of English Law’, Speculum 18 (1943),
## PP- 395-436.
13 Karl Vossler, Sprachgemeinscbaft und Interessengemeinschaft (Munich, 1924); Leonard Bloomfield,
Language (New York, 1933), pp. 42-56; Joshua Fishman, Sociolinguistics (Rowley, MA, 1970),
pp. 28-35.
14 Louis-Jean Calvet, Linguistique et colonialisme (Paris, 1974); Calvet, Language Wars and Linguistic
Politics (1987: English translation, Oxford, 1998); Ralph Grillo, Dominant Languages: Language and
Hierarchy in Britain and France (Cambridge, 1989).

6 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
way, whenever we say ‘we’, we are expressing a sense of solidarity with
some others, a sense of belonging to a community, whether it is small or
large, temporary or permanent, harmonious or discordant. It might also
be argued that solidarity and conflict are two sides of the same coin, and
that conflicts between vernaculars encourage language loyalty and language
consciousness.
If real communities are messy affairs, ideal ones - ‘imagined commu¬
nities’, as Benedict Anderson has called them - have clear boundaries.
Imagined communities, like other figments of the imagination, have real
effects, and attempts to create communities by imposing a particular lan¬
guage or variety of language have important consequences, even if they
are not always the consequences intended by the planners. Hence we have
to examine the role of languages not only as expressions or reflections of
a sense of community cohesion, but also as one of the means by which
communities are constructed or reconstructed.15
The more distinctive the language, the more cohesive the community
is likely to be, and vice versa. To speak of the English speech community
in the singular has come to sound rather odd, and it is more useful to
distinguish different communities and their ‘Englishes’.16
It is also necessary to bear in mind the fact that individuals can and usu¬
ally do belong to a number of different communities: local and national,
religious, occupational and so on. Some of these communities are in com¬
petition, or even in conflict, for the loyalty of individual speakers - region
versus nation, for instance. As socio-linguists have often pointed out, peo¬
ple use different forms or varieties of language, whether consciously or
unconsciously, to express their solidarity with these different communities.
This is a major reason for what is sometimes described as ‘code-switching’,
the practice of shifting between languages or varieties of language.
Individual speakers may therefore be regarded as performing different
‘acts of identity’ according to the situation in which they find themselves.17
In other words, a record of the language used by an individual on a particular
occasion does not reveal his or her identity, let alone his or her national
identity. It is no more than the record of the identity that came to the fore
on that occasion.
15 Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (1983: revised ed., 1991); Robert Le Page and
Andr£e Iabouret-Keller, Acts of Identity (Cambridge, 1985); Deborah Cameron, ‘Demystifying
Sociolinguistics: or why language does not reflect society', in John E. Joseph and Talbot J. Taylor
(eds.), Ideologies of Language (London, 1990): Glyn Williams, Sociolinguistics: a Sociological Critique
(London, 1992).
1 lorn McArthur, The English Languages (Cambridge, 1998).
17 Le Page and Tabourot-Keller, Acts.

## 7
Prologue: communities and domains
Linguists often use the term ‘diglossia’ to describe the situation in which
two or more languages or varieties of language are used by the same speak¬
ers in different ‘speech domains’, addressing different people or introduc¬
ing different topics. One variety is typically more prestigious than the
other, as in the case of classical and colloquial Arabic, with the high variety
used for example to speak about religion, the lower about more mun¬
dane topics.18 In the case of early modern Europe, examples include the
use of French as a high variety by speakers of Occitan; Spanish by speak¬
ers of Catalan; German by speakers of Danish, and the general use of
Latin for the discussion of scholarly topics. It is important to remember
that the balance between languages or varieties is not a stable one and
that it sometimes shifted in the course of the three centuries discussed
below.
This pair of concepts, ‘diglossia’ and ‘speech domain’, will recur in the
following pages. They are essential concepts in the approach followed here,
concerned as it is with languages in the plural, with communities in the
plural, and finally with a plurality of relations between the two.
## THE COMPARATIVE APPROACH
The question, how many languages existed in early modern Europe, is at
once obvious and deceptive. When is a language a language, and when is
it a dialect? The classic answer takes the form of the epigram attributed to
more than one famous linguist to the effect that a language is a dialect with
an army, navy and air force. The political criterion is indeed an appropriate
one in the case of the last two hundred or two hundred and fifty years, the
age of what has been called the ‘politicization of language’, its increasingly
close association with nations and nationalism (below, p. 166). It is much
less applicable to early modern times.
In the early Middle Ages, the frontiers between Latin and the romance
languages, or between different romance or Germanic or Slav languages,
were still indefinite. Even in the early modern period, when print and other
factors were contributing to the process of standardization, the frontiers
between languages, like the frontiers between states, were less clear-cut
than they became in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.19
18 Charles Ferguson, ‘Diglossia’, Words') (1959), pp. 325—40.
19 Vaughan Cornish, Borderlands of Language in Europe and their Relation to the Historic Frontiers of
Christendom (London, 1936); Michel Banniard, Viva voce: communication ecrite et communication
orale du TVe au Die siecle en Occident latin (Paris, 1992); Michael Richter, Studies in Medieval Language
and Culture (Dublin, 1995).

## 8
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Slovaks, for example, wrote in what we call ‘Czech and Norwegians
wrote in what we call ‘Danish’. It has been suggested that it might be more
appropriate to refer to early modern ‘Scandinavian’ rather than to Danish,
Swedish and Norwegian as separate languages.20 A similar point might be
made about the South Slav languages before the creation of‘Serbo-Croat’ in
the middle of the nineteenth century. Indeed, the sixteenth-century Polish
chronicler Marcin Bielski treated all the Slavic languages as dialects of a
single language.
It is hard to disagree with the French linguist Antoine Meillet when
he declared it ‘impossible’ to say how many languages exist, or with the
Norwegian linguist Einar Haugen when he admitted, in a classic essay on
language and dialect, that ‘there is no answer to these questions’.21 If there
is no precise or objective answer to the question, how many languages, it is
surely better to offer a rough estimate than none at all. Five hundred years
ago, from forty to seventy languages were spoken in Europe, forty according
to a narrow definition and seventy according to a wider one (Appendix). It
is worth noting that linguists today claim that there are from three thousand
to five thousand languages in the world — a considerable margin of error or
vagueness.
However counter-intuitive this may seem to Europeans, and in particular
to anglophones, even seventy languages is a very small number compared
to the eighty million people living in Europe in 1500 or the one hundred
and eighty million living there in 1789. Today, the languages of Europe
account for a mere 4 per cent of the world total, compared to 15 per cent in
the Americas, 31 per cent in Africa and 50 per cent in Asia and the Pacific.22
From the point of view of humanity, every language may be regarded a
treasure, contributing something to the common stock of culture.23 For a
given region, however, this treasure is not necessarily an advantage, eco¬
nomically at any rate. Indeed, a case might be made lor the existence of an
inverse relationship in which poor regions are rich in languages and vice
versa.
The historians who study the rise of the early modern West and, increas¬
ingly, of early modern China as well, might therefore be well advised to pay
more attention to language. A relative lack of languages meant a relative
20 Jahr, Language Change, p. 128.
21 P. J. Antoine Meillet (1914) ‘Le probl^me dc la parent^ des langues', repr. his Linguistique historique
et linguistiquegenbale (2 vols., Paris, 1921-38), vol. 1, pp. 76-101, at 76; cf. Einar Haugen, ‘Dialect,
Language, and Nation (1966: repr. The Ecology of Language, Stanford, 1972), pp. 237—54.
22 David Crystal, Language Death (Cambridge, 2000).
23 George Steiner, After Babel (Oxford, 1975).

## 9
Prologue: communities and domains
lack of obstacles to communication. In 1600, China had a population of
some one hundred and fifty million, larger than that of Europe at the time,
but only one main written and spoken language, despite the presence of
Cantonese and other languages in the South.
The overview presented here takes the form of an essay in comparative
history. There is something of a paradox in offering a comparative history
of language as a novelty, since pioneers in comparative history, notably
Marc Bloch, learned this approach from linguists such as Antoine Meillet,
who themselves stood in a tradition going back to the late eighteenth
century if not further.2'4 Again, two Italian scholars, Riccardo Picchio and
Aldo Scaglione, one of them a specialist on Slav languages and the other on
German, have fruitfully extended the traditional Italian concept of language
debate, La questione della lingua, to other parts of Europe.25 More recently
the French linguist Daniel Baggioni, inspired by the historian Fernand
Braudel to study change over the long term, has produced a comparative
survey of European languages and nations over the last five hundred years.26
All the same, a survey of the secondary literature reveals that studies of single
languages predominate.
What follows is, I hope, a small step towards future surveys of the dif¬
ferent tongues of Europe in interaction over the centuries, in other words
(relatively new words) an ‘ecology of language’, placing language in its cul¬
tural and social environment, studying Latin in relation to the vernaculars,
the vernaculars in relation to one another and the dialects of a given ver¬
nacular in relation to the standard language.27 It is a reconnaissance of a
large terrain, an attempt to produce a provisional map - including blank
spaces where necessary - in the hope of encouraging further exploration.
## THREE PROBLEMS
Such a history faces three major problems, which should be borne in mind
throughout by the reader of this book, just as the author has tried to bear
them in mind in the course of research and writing. They are the problem
of periodization, the problem of evidence and the problem of explanation.
14 L. Walker, A Note on Historical Linguistics and Marc Bloch’s Comparative Method’, History and
Theory 19 (1980), pp. 154-64.
25 Riccardo Picchio, ‘Guidelines for a Comparative Study of the Language Question among the Slavs’,
in Picchio and Harvey Goldblatt (eds.), Aspects of the Slavic Language Question, 2 vols. (New Haven,
1984), vol. 1, pp. 1-42; Aldo Scaglione, ‘The Rise of National Languages: East and West’, in Scaglione
(ed.), The Emergence of National Languages (Ravenna, 1984), pp. 9—49-
16 Daniel Baggioni, Langues et nations en Europe (Paris, 1997).
27 Einar Haugen, ‘The Ecology of Language’, repr. Ecology, pp. 325-39.

io Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Every language has its own chronology. The use of Old Church Slavonic,
for example, was at its height between noo and 1700. The Celtic languages
went through their ‘dark age’ from around 1550 to around 1700. Norwegian
scholars treat the years 1530-1814 as a discrete period in the history of their
language, the time when it was dominated by Danish. In similar fashion,
what is known as ‘old Finnish lasted from 1540 to 1820.28 I he problem
then is to choose beginning and end dates for a book that attempts to deal
with Europe as a whole.
In his recent study of languages and nations, Daniel Baggioni distin¬
guished what he called three ‘ecolinguistic’ revolutions in European history,
around the years 1500, 1800, and 2000.29 My decision, not very different
from his, is to begin in the middle of the fifteenth century with the printing
press, since print had important consequences for written and even, in the
long term, for spoken languages. The book ends in the later eighteenth
century with the rise of national consciousness and language planning. In
France, for instance, at the time of the Revolution, Henri Gregoire, a priest
and a deputy to the National Assembly, advocated the teaching of French
everywhere in France in order ‘to melt the citizens into a national mass’
(fondre tous les citoyens dans une masse nationale).3°
Needless to say, a case might be made for other dates. For instance, 1492
is a date of obvious importance in the history of the languages of Europe
as well as the New World. In the history of American English, 1776 is a
significant date, like 1788 in that of the language of Australia, which has
been described as ‘English transported’.31
It is also important to note that major trends in the history of European
languages had begun before Johann Gutenberg set up his press in Mainz,
around the year 1450. For example, in some domains, such as the adminis¬
tration, Latin was being replaced by some vernaculars in the early fifteenth
century (in the English chancery), in the fourteenth century, or even, in
the case of the chancery of Castille, in the thirteenth century. In cases like
these, the best thing is to transgress one’s own boundaries.
The second major problem to be faced is the problem of evidence. This
book is concerned with both written and spoken language. The evidence
for the domain of writing and also for that of print is abundant enough.
On the other hand, the problem of reconstructing the spoken language is
2ti Banfi, Emanuele (eel.), La formazione dell’Europa linguistica (Florence, 1993), pp. 164, 354; Didrik
A. Seip, Norwegische Sprachgescbickte (Berlin, 1971); Aurelien Sauvageot, ‘Le finnois de Finlande’, in
IstvAn Fodor and Claude Hagfcge (eds.), Language Reform, vol. in (Hamburg, 1984), pp. 173-90.
29 Baggioni, Langues, pp. 47-50. 30 Certcau, Politique.
31 William S. Ramson (ed.), English Transported (Canberra, 1970).

## II
Prologue: communities and domains
an acute one. Essentially, historians have to use written evidence of speech
while knowing that it cannot be fully trusted. Even historians of language
in the twentieth century have had to grapple with this problem.32
In the age before the tape recorder, judicial records are the sources that
give historians the opportunity to come closest to hearing the voices of
ordinary people. The evidence of plays - including those of Shakespeare
and Jonson, Lope de Vega and Moliere, Holberg and Goldoni, who will all
be called to give testimony in the following pages - is equally vivid, even if
the representation of speech, especially in comedies, was probably stylized
and stereotyped.33
Dictionaries of the period allow historians to avoid relying too exclusively
on playwrights and satirists, since they offer valuable testimony to what
the compilers and their circle considered to be low or high usage. For
instance, Pierre Richelet’s Dictionnairefrangais (1680) often comments that
a particular term or phrase is ‘has’, ‘populaire’, and so on, and Samuel
Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language (1755) does the same.34
For a historian interested in language consciousness, to be discussed
in chapter 1, there is also much to be learned from the descriptions of
countries by foreign travellers, whose ears are sometimes well tuned to the
distinctive qualities of local speech. For example, the Englishman Philip
Skippon, making the Grand Tour of Italy in the 1660s together with his
Cambridge tutor, John Ray, set down his (or their) observations on local
customs, including speech habits. Skippon noted, for instance, how people
laughed and talked during Mass, or during meetings of the Great Council
in Venice, while at a play the audience ‘stamped and whistled and called to
one another’ and those sitting on the stage ‘would often interrupt the actors
and discourse with them’. Fie recorded the most popular swear-words and
the differences in regional accents. In Milan, for instance, he noted that
‘the people . . . leave out the last vowels of words’, and in Bologna that ‘the
vulgar speak Italian very corruptly, cutting their terminating vowels off and
huddling their words together’.35
Even advertisements in the newspapers have been used effectively by
historians of language. Descriptions of runaway servants in the colonial
American press noted their speech habits, such as ‘plain’, ‘slow’, or ‘broad
31 Johannes Fabian, Language and Colonial Power (Cambridge, 1986).
33 For a balanced discussion of the problem, focusing on Moliere, see Roger LathuilRre, La preciosite
(Geneva, 1966), pp. 143-57.
34 Cf. Ferdinand Brunot, Langue fran^aise, vol. iv, 1660—1715, pp. 161-79.
35 Philip Skippon, ‘An Account of a Journey’, in Awnsley and John Churchill (eds.), A Collection of
Voyages (6 vols., London, 1732), vol. vr, pp. 489, 502, 510, 520, 534, 582.

12 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Yorkshire’ as a help to identifying them. In similar fashion, the description
of a runaway apprentice in the Belfast Newsletter for 1756 as someone who
‘speaks the Scotch tongue’ has been employed to argue that this accent had
become unusual enough in Northern Ireland by this time to serve as a clue
to an individual’s identity.36
The third major problem is the problem of explanation. Explanations
of linguistic change, like other historical explanations, may be divided
into two main categories, internal and external. Both have their value. In
this book, concerned as it is with cultural history, external factors will be
privileged. Problems remain, notably the relative importance of structure
and agency and the contrast between actor- or speaker-oriented accounts
and system-oriented ones.
On one side, the system side, we find both the nineteenth-century lin¬
guists who treated language as an organism in evolution and the more
recent structuralists, as well as post-structuralists such as Jacques Derrida,
who follows the philosopher Martin Heidegger in claiming that although
humans act as if they control language, language is actually in control of
them.37
On the action side, by contrast, we find the argument that ‘it is speak¬
ers not languages which innovate' in a process of everyday ‘speech acts’.38
Individuals can play a role in language change, and a number of impor¬
tant individuals will recur in these pages: Pietro Bembo in the case of
Italian, Claude de Vaugelas in that of French, Martin Luther in that of
German, Shakespeare in that of English and so on.39 Conscious collec¬
tive action can also be identified in the early modern period. If it is
too early to speak of ‘language planning’, it is not too soon to refer to
language ‘campaigns’, like the battles for purification to be discussed in
chapter 6.
All the same, as in other kinds of history, the unintended consequences
of conscious actions also need to be taken into consideration. For example,
the emigration ol the southern Netherlanders northwards lor religious and
political reasons at the end of the sixteenth century, when Spanish armies
suppressed the revolt of Antwerp and Ghent against King Philip II, made
36 Allen W. Read, ‘ 1 he Assimilation of the Speech ot British Immigrants in Colonial America \ Journal
of English and Germanic Philology 37 (1938), pp. 70-9; Philip Robinson, ‘The Scots Language in
Seventeenth-Century Ulster’, Ulster Folklife 35 (1989), pp. 86-99, at P- 98-
37 Jacques Derrida, Dissemination (1972: English translation, Chicago, 1982), especially chapter 1.
18 James Milroy, Linguistic Variation and Change (London, 1992), p. 169; cf. Milroy, ‘Toward a Speaker-
Based Account of Language Change’, in Jahr, Language Change, pp. 21-36.
39 Bruno Migliorini,' 1 he Contribution of the Individual to Language’ (1952: repr. in Saggi Linguistici,
Florence, 1956), pp. 318-30.

Prologue: communities and domains 13
a considerable impact on the language of the north, especially Amsterdam
(below, p. 39).
In short, neither structural explanations nor explanations in terms of
action seem sufficient by themselves. Is a synthesis between them possible?
A way towards a possible synthesis is shown by a recurrent problem in
the history of language, as in cultural history in general, the problem
ol reception, in this case the difficulty of explaining why some speech
acts were successful while others were not. Some of Shakespeare’s neolo¬
gisms have passed into ordinary language, but others are only remembered
by professional students of the plays. The individual proposes but the
community disposes, in the sense of accepting some innovations into the
repertoire and turning them into current usage, while resisting others or
allowing them to fall by the wayside. The road to the modern vernacu¬
lars is strewn with forgotten neologisms. In other words, speech commu¬
nities as well as individuals have played an active role in the history of
language.
## STORIES
Despite its thematic organization, this book also attempts to tell a story. A
survey of the use of Latin and the communities that it fostered (chapter 2)
is followed by a discussion of the so-called ‘rise of the vernaculars’, partly
at the expense of Latin (chapter 3). As the vernaculars expanded into new
domains, it became more important to standardize them (chapter 4). Inter¬
action between rival vernaculars led to exchanges, or language ‘mixing’
(chapter 5). The mixing process provoked some hostile reactions, which
took the form of movements of language purification (chapter 6). These
‘puritan’ movements became still stronger following the ‘nationalization’ of
language from the late eighteenth century onwards (epilogue).
All the same, the story to be told in these pages is not a simple linear one,
still less a story of progress. If this book has a single theme, it is the con¬
stant conflict between centripetal and centrifugal forces, convergence and
divergence, assimilation and resistance, discipline and freedom, unity and
diversity. As Antoine Meillet observed almost a century ago, in the history
of language ‘deux tendances antagonistes sont en jeu, Tune vers la differen¬
tiation, l’autre vers funification’.40 We see divergence with the breakup of
the Church and invasion of the domain of print by some vernaculars, but
40 Antoine Meillet, ‘DifFerenciation et unification dans les langues’ (1911: repr. in his Linguistique
historique), pp. 110—29, at p. no.

14 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
we see convergence too, as print helped standardize the vernaculars, and
the Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, British and other empires expanded.
It may well be the case that some periods are more favourable to unifi¬
cation, just as some periods are favourable to large empires, as the French
historian Fernand Braudel argued in his famous study The Mediterranean
(1949). Looking at the early modern period, it often seems that the central¬
izing, standardizing forces are winning, for both political and technological
reasons (the rise of printed matter and the centralizing state). We seem to
be in a similar situation today, in an age of globalization. All the same, we
should not underestimate the strength of decentralizing forces, the power
of resistance, or the resilience of linguistic and cultural traditions.

## CHAPTER I
■Speaky that I may see thee: the discovery of language
in early modern Europe
In the prologue, the point of view expressed was that of scholars today,
whether linguists or historians. Language was a topic on which a number
of early modern Europeans also expressed their opinions, sometimes force¬
fully. A study of languages and communities cannot afford to neglect such
opinions.1 2 The following account is not intended as a history of linguistics,
emphasizing the achievement of individual scholars, but rather as a map of
attitudes to language, or changes in attitude, as revealed in commonplaces,
or in ideas that gradually became commonplace at this time. Indeed, we
might describe the early modern period as the age of what I shall call the
'discovery of language’.
## THE LATER MIDDLE AGES
The point of this dramatic expression is not to suggest that medieval people
were unconcerned with the languages that they were speaking and writ¬
ing. In thirteenth-century Spain, for example, the standardization of the
language associated with King Alfonso the Wise (below, p. 63) implied
knowledge of the alternatives to that standard. The fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, in particular, were a time of increasing linguistic awareness, not
only in the Italy of the early Renaissance but also in England, France and
## Central Europe.1
In Italy, for instance, Dante contributed to the debate on the vernacular
in his De vulgari eloquentia, written around the year 1305. In England,
Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, written in the late fourteenth century,
1 For a survey, see Emma Martinell Gifre and Mar Cruz Pinol (eds.), La consciencia linguistica en
Europa (Barcelona, 1996); for a case-study, Claudio Marazzini, Storia e coscienza della lingua in Italia
dall’umanesimo al romanticismo (Turin, 1989).
2 Vivian H. Galbraith, ‘Language and Nationality in Medieval England’, Transactions of the Royal His¬
torical Society 23 (1941), pp. 113-28; Anna Daube, Der Aufiteigder Muttersprache im deutschen Denken
des is und 16Jahrhunderts (Frankfurt, 1949); Serge Lusignan, Parler vulgairement: les intellectuels et la
langue frangaise aux i^e et 14c siecles (Montreal and Paris, 1986).
## A

16 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
reveal the social position of each pilgrim through his or her language,
with the Reeve and the Miller, for example, speaking in churls terms , in
other words, lower-class English.3 4 In early fifteenth-century Bohemia, the
religious reformer Jan Hus was worried by the influence of German on
Czech and tried to defend his native language (below, p. 150).
The fear of what we now call 'language death was expressed on a
number of occasions in the Middle Ages. In 1295, Edward I of England
claimed that the King of France planned to invade England and 'wipe out
the English language’. At the end of the fourteenth century, according to the
chronicler Adam of Usk, the King of England considered 'a decree for the
destruction of the Welsh language’ (decretum destructions lingue wallicae).
In similar fashion, a Polish chronicler recorded the story that the knights of
the Teutonic Order intended ‘to exterminate the Polish language’. Again,
speeches in the English parliament in the fourteenth century - ironically
enough, delivered or at least recorded in French - claimed that the French
wanted ‘to annihilate the whole nation and the English language’ (aneantir
tote la nation et la langue Engleys)d
## DISCOVERING LANGUAGE
Ail the same, from the middle of the fifteenth century onwards, more people
were becoming conscious of varieties of language and some people were
becoming more sharply aware of these matters than before, even if they did
not agree how to use key terms like ‘language’, ‘dialect’ or 'idiom'. Some
scholars have gone so far as to speak of a ‘crisis’ of language at the end oi the
Middle Ages.5 However, ‘discovery’ seems a more appropriate word than
‘crisis’, since the change to be described in the following pages was gradual
rather than sudden, not a moment but a process.
At a philosophical level, the revival oi the classics at the Renaissance
inspired a return to the ancient debate over the relation between words
and things expressed in Plato’s dialogue Cratylus and Aristotle’s treatise
3 Christopher Cannon, The Making of Chaucer's English: a Study of Words (Cambridge, 1998), p. 149.
4 Robert Bartlett, The Making of Europe (1993: second ed., Harmondsworth, 1994), p. 202; Adam
quoted in Peter R. Roberts, ‘The Welsh Language, English Law and Tudor Legislation’, Transactions
Cymmrodorion (1989), pp. 19-75, at P- 2In: the Annals of Cracow, quoted in Bartlett, p. 203; speeches
quoted in Susan Crane, 'Social Aspects of Bilingualism in the Thirteenth Century’, in Michael
Prestwich, R. H. Britnell and Robin Frame (eds.), Thirteenth-Century England (Woodbridge, 1989),
pp. 103-15, at p. 113.
5 Gianfranco Folena, 'Espansione e crisi dell’italiano quattrocentesco’ (1953: repr. Folena, II linguaggio
del caos: studi sulplurilinguismo rinascimentale, Turin, 1991), pp. 3-17.

## 17
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
On InterpretationT At a more pragmatic level, language consciousness was
encouraged by the fact that increasing numbers of people were study¬
ing Greek and Hebrew as well as different European vernaculars (below,
p. 114). Interest in the history of languages and in linguistic diversity
becomes more visible around the year 1500, including the discussion of
some ideas that in a more formal dress we would now describe as forming
part of‘sociolinguistics’.
For example, the functions of language in general and of certain lan¬
guages, such as Latin, in particular became an object of critical attention
on the part of religious and social reformers. In sixteenth-century Italy, two
unorthodox thinkers from the lower classes condemned the use of Latin in
the ecclesiastical and legal domains. Giambattista Gelli, a shoemaker who
achieved fame by publishing dialogues, put into the mouth of one of his
speakers the idea that the point of the Latin liturgy was to keep the faith
secret from the laity, to exclude them from the community of the Church.
Menocchio the miller, a forgotten figure until he was brought back to life
by the historian Carlo Ginzburg, declared that speaking Latin in court was
‘a betrayal of the poor’, since it prevented ordinary people from following
the proceedings.6 7
Similar ideas were expressed in seventeenth-century England, especially
during the civil wars, when the use of Latin in the universities and French
in the law courts was denounced by radicals such as the clergyman William
Dell, the shoemaker Samuel How, author of The Sufficiency of the Spirits
Teaching (163;9) and the Digger leader Gerrard Winstanley. The main point
of these critiques was that the use of foreign languages allowed professionals
to mystify and so to dominate ordinary people.8
## DEFECIT AND ABUNDANCE
Much more widespread was the concern with the riches or poverty (what
linguists now call the ‘defeat’) of particular languages. One might even
speak of the ‘anxiety of defecit’.9 As in the later Middle Ages, there were
6 Marie-Lucie Demonet, Les voix du signe. Nature et origine du langage d la Renaissance (1480-1580)
(Paris, 1992).
7 Giambattista Gelli, Capricci del bottaio (Florence, 1546), the fifth dialogue; Carlo Ginzburg, Cheese
and Worms (1976: English translation, London, 1980), p. 9.
8 Christopher Hill, Puritanism and Revolution (London, 1958), p. 73; Hill, The World Turned Upside
Down (London, 1972), pp. 269-76; Peter Burke, ‘William Dell, the Universities, and the Radical
Tradition’, in Geoff Eley and William Hunt (eds.), Reviving the English Revolution (London, 1988),
pp. 181—9.
9 I owe the term ‘anxiety of defecit’ to Richard Helgerson.

18 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
comments on the poverty of the vernaculars by comparison with Latin. In
the case of Polish, a native speaker referred in 1566 to the poverty of the
language (niedostatek), while the poet Szymon Szymonowic expressed his
regret for what he called ‘the acute lack of words among us’ (u nas brak
wielki w slowiech).10 Even Joachim Du Bellay, in his famous apologia for
French, the Deffense et illustration de la languefran^oyse admitted that
‘our language is not as copious and rich as Greek and Latin’ (nostre lan¬
gue n ’estsi copieuse et riche que la Grecque et le Latin), and limited himself to
arguing (in book 1, chapter 4) that it was not as poor as many people think.
Comments of this kind have been described as instances of the ‘humility
topos’.11 That they also had some empirical justification is suggested by
the frequent use of Latin words and phrases in some European languages
whenever abstractions were needed, a practice which was common until
the later seventeenth century (below, p. 131).
On the other side, however, references to linguistic abundance or copi¬
ousness became more and more frequent. Thus the printer Sebastian Franck
claimed in 1541 that no language had ‘so many varieties and formulae for
speaking’ as German (so vil varietet und Formulas zu reden)\ the human¬
ist Claudio Tolomei described Italian in his dialogue II Cesano (1546) as
‘richer’ than Greek or Latin. The merchant Richard Eden declared in 1562
that English was no longer ‘indigent’ because it had been ‘enriched and
amplified’ by translations like the ones he had himself undertaken.12 Hen¬
drik Spieghel claimed in 1584 that Dutch was ‘richer’ than other languages.
In his Discurso sobre la lengua castellana (1585), Ambrosio Morales called
Spanish ‘equal to all the good languages in abundance, propriety, variety
and beauty’ (igual con todas las buenas en propriedad, variedad y lindeza).'3
Christian Gueintz, a German superintendent of schools, declared in 1641
that ‘The perfection of the German language is so great that virtually noth¬
ing can be discovered that cannot be named in this language’ (Die Volligkeit
der Deutschen Sprache ist so gros dass auch fast nichts kan gefunden werden
welches man in dieser sprache nicht nennen konnte)D Comments of this kind
form part of what might be called ‘the topos of pride’, a topos that turned
into a literary genre (below, p. 65).
10 Claude Backvis, Quelques remarques sur le bilinguisme Lttino-polonais dans la Pologne du xvie siecle
(Brussels, 1958), p. izn.
11 Andrzej Borowski, ‘General Theory of Translation in Old Polish Literary Culture’, in Giovanna
Brogi Bercoff et al. (eds.), Traduzione e rielaborazione nelle letterature di Polonia, Ucraina e Russia
(Alessandria, 1999), pp. 2.3—38, at p. 27.
12 Eden quoted in Richard F. Jones, Triumph of the English Language (Stanford, 1953) p. 92.
13 Jos6 Francisco Pastor (ed.), Las apologias de la lengua castellana en elsiglo de oro (Madrid, 1929), p. 78.
14 Gueintz quoted in Erich Strassner, Deutsche Sprachkultur (Tubingen, 1995), p. 67.

The discovery of language in early modern Europe
## 19
The sense of abundance was encouraged by the introduction of many
new words into the European vernaculars, a process that gave rise to a
lively debate in which words were often compared to immigrants seeking
citizenship. Thus Du Bellay declared in his Dejfense that new words ‘seront
en notre langue comme etrangers dans un cite’. The comparison of foreign
words to Tree denizens’ who have been or are trying to be ‘naturalized’ was
also made by two English poets, George Peele, who approved of the process,
and Samuel Daniel, who regretted it.15 There was a general European debate
about the mixture of languages and the need to purify them, a debate to
be discussed in detail below (pp. niff, pp. i4iff.).
The remainder of this chapter focuses on two themes that will receive less
emphasis later in the book than those of abundance, mixture or purity: in
the first place, views of the history of different languages, a history that was
studied systematically in this period; in the second place, attitudes to lin¬
guistic diversity, a topic on which individuals commented unsystematically
from time to time.
## I. THE HISTORY OF LANGUAGE
As change becomes more rapid there is usually more awareness of change,
in language as in other domains of culture. Giorgio Vasari’s history of
Italian art, for example, was written in the middle of the sixteenth century,
following the major changes that the author was the first to describe as the
‘Renaissance’.
In the case of language, the schoolmaster Richard Mulcaster (writing in
1582) described ‘this present period of our English tongue’ as ‘the very height
thereof, while in 1635 Juan de Robles declared that Spanish was ‘in the state
that Latin was at the time of Cicero’ (Esta hoy nuestro lengua en el estado
que la Latina estuvo en tiempo de Ciceron).16 The Academie Fran^aise made
the same point about French two generations later in the preface to the
first edition of its famous dictionary (1694). This increasingly acute sense
of change was encouraged by and in its turn encouraged the publication of
histories of different languages.
It was the so-called ‘dead’ languages, Latin, Hebrew, and to a lesser extent
Greek, that attracted most historical interest, at least at first. The idea of
a ‘dead’ language itself goes back to the debates among Italian humanists
at this time. In Sperone Speroni’s Dialogo della lingua (1542), one speaker
15 Peek and Daniel quoted in Paula Blank, Broken English: Dialects and the Politics of Language in
Renaissance Writings (London, 1996), p. 20.
16 Quoted in Jones, Triumph, p. 165 and Weinrich, Wege, p. 179.

20 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
remarked that Latin was not a spoken language but 'simply paper and
ink’ (carta solamente ed inchiostro), while in Benedetto Varchi’s LErcolano
(1570), languages were classified into ‘living’, ‘half-alive’ (mezze vive) and
## ‘dead’.'7
In the middle of the fifteenth century, the humanist Lorenzo Valla had
already discussed the relation between the rise and fall of Latin and the
rise and fall of the Roman Empire, while his colleagues Leonardo Bruni
and Flavio Biondo debated the question of the language spoken by the
ancient Romans, whether it was Latin or Italian.Following the model
of the Roman scholar Varro’s history of Latin (a text that had survived in
fragmentary form), Cardinal Adriano Castellesi wrote a treatise on Latin, De
sermone latino (1515), dividing the history of the language into four periods,
‘most ancient’, ‘ancient’, ‘perfect’ and ‘imperfect’, a division followed by
later writers such as Angelo Rocca in his Osservazioni intorno alia bellezza
della lingua Latina (1590). In 1538, the French scholar Guillaume Postel
published a study of the origins of Hebrew.’9 For a history of Greek, on
the other hand, it was necessary to wait until the middle of the seventeenth
century, when another French scholar, Claude de Saumaise, published his
study of the language in the late classical or Hellenistic period.20
Valla’s remarks about language and empire were adapted to the case
of contemporary Castilian by the Spanish humanist Antonio Nebrija.
Nebrija’s Gramatica castellana (1492) included the famous phrase in the
dedication to Queen Isabella that ‘language was always the companion of
empire’ (Siempre la lengua fue companera del imperio). The author argued
that Hebrew, Greek and Latin had all had their day, and that the time of
Spanish had now come.21
Histories of the vernaculars followed the model of histories of Latin.
In the sixteenth century, the Benedictine Joachim Perion and the lawyers
Etienne Pasquier and Claude Fauchet all wrote on the history of French.22
The Florentine scholar Vincenzio Borghini’s work on the history of Italian
17 Sperone Speroni, Dialogo della lingua (1542: ed. Helene Harth, Munich, 1975), p. 92; Benedetto
Varchi, LErcolano (Venice, 1570), pp. 93-4.
lfi Cecil Grayson, A Renaissance Controversy, Latin or Italian (Oxford, 1959); Mirko Tavoni, Latino,
grammatica, volgare (Padua, 1984).
19 Guillaume Postel, Origines hebraicae linguae (Paris, 1538). Cf. Arno Borst’s encyclopaedic work,
Der Turmbau von Babel, 4 vols. in 6 (Stuttgart, 1957-63), pp. 1128-31; Demonet, Les voix du signe,
pp. 337ff.
20 Claude de Saumaise, Hellenistica (Leiden, 1643).
21 On Nebrija, Francisco Rico, Nebrija frente a los barbaros (Salamanca, 1978); Miguel Angel Esparza
Lorres, Las ideas linguistics de Antonio de Nebrija (Minister, 1995).
11 Joachim Perion, De linguae gallicae origine (Paris, 1554); Etienne Pasquier, Recbercbes de la France
(Paris, 1566); Claude Fauchet, Origine de la langue franyaise (Paris, 1581).

## 21
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
remained in manuscript, but in the year 1600 a Sienese, Celso Cittadini,
published an account of what he called ‘the formation of the Tuscan lan¬
guage’.13 Two studies of the history of English were published five years
later, one by the famous scholar William Camden (in his Remains) and
the other by the Catholic Richard Verstegan.24 At much the same time,
Bernardo de Aldrete, a canon of Cordoba, wrote on the history of Spanish
and Duarte Nunes de Leao on Portuguese.25 For a history of German, on the
other hand, it would be necessary to wait until Johann Augustin Egenolffs
Historie der Teutschen Sprache (1716), in which the author lamented that
German scholars had fallen behind their European colleagues. For histories
of Slavonic languages, readers had to wait even longer.
The interest in the roots of languages (as well as of individual words) is
revealed by the common use of the term ‘origin’ in the titles of books on
the history of Hebrew, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and
so on. A favourite topic, and a controversial one, was the original language
of humanity, the language of Adam, or if not of Adam, at least the language
of Japhet (son of Noah), who was believed to have migrated to Europe after
the Flood.26
It had often been argued, from the time of St Jerome onwards, that this
original language was Hebrew, a theory that gained support when words
in some American Indian languages seemed to suggest Hebrew origins.27
Other scholars supported the claims of Chaldean or Scythian (sometimes
identified with Gothic, German or Celtic). The Frenchman Jean Picard
argued the case for French, Johannes Goropius of Antwerp for Flemish,
Olof Rudbeck of Uppsala and others for Swedish, while the French Jesuit
Joachim Bouvet and the English architect John Webb argued the case for
## Chinese.28
23 Mario Pozzi, ‘II pensiero linguistico di Vincenzo Borghini’, Giornale Storico della Letteratura Italiana
88 (1971), pp. 216—94; Vincenzio Borghini, Scritti inediti e ran, ed. John R. Woodhouse (Bologna,
1971) ; Celso Cittadini, Formazione della Lingua toscana (Florence, 1600); cf. Claudio Marazzini, Storia
e coscienza della lingua in Italia dall’Umanesimo al Romanticismo (Turin, 1989), pp. 39-45; Michael
T. Wood, ‘Bernardo Aldrete and Celso Cittadini’, Hispanic Review 61 (1993), pp. 65—85.
24 William Camden, Remains Concerning Britain (London, 1605); Richard Verstegan, Restitution of
Decayed Intelligence (sine loco, 1605).
25 Bernardo de Aldrete, Del origen, y principio de la lengua castellana (1604: facsimile ed., Madrid,
1972) ; cf. Ward, ‘Aldrete’, and Kathryn A. Woolard, ‘Bernardo de Aldrete and the Morisco Problem’,
Comparative Studies in Society and History 44 (2002), pp. 446-80; Duarte Nunes de Leao, Origem
de linguaportuguesa (1606: in Maria Leonor Carvalhao Buescu (ed.), Ortografia e Origem da Lingua
## Portuguesa, Lisbon, 1983).
26 Hans Aarsleff‘The Rise and Decline of Adam and his Ursprache in Seventeenth-Century Thought’,
in Allison P. Coudert (ed.), The Language of Adam (Wiesbaden, 1999), pp. 277-95.
27 Edward G. Gray, New World Babel: Languages and Nations in Early America (Princeton, 1999), p. 240.
28 On the debate, Claude Gilbert Dubois, Mythe et langage au i6e siecle (Bordeaux, 1970), pp. 83—92. On
Goropius and Rudbeck, Johan Nordstrom, De Yverborenes 6 (Stockholm, 1934), pp. ni-15,134-54;

22 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In similar fashion, a controversy developed about the nature of primor¬
dial Castilian’, which some thought had been created at Babel and brought
to Spain by Tubal (grandson of Noah), while Aldrete argued that it had
gradually developed out of Latin at the time that Spain was a province of the
Roman Empire. Returning to the analogy used by Valla and Nebrija, but
thinking of the New World, Aldrete declared that conquered peoples have
to adapt or ‘accommodate’ themselves to the language of the conquerors
and that ‘languages are like empires, that rise to a peak and then fall again,
without being able to recover’ (las lenguas son como los imperios, que suben
a la cumber, de la cual como van caiendo, no se vuelven a recobrar).29 Again,
in his history of Portuguese, Nunes de Leao noted that ‘just as conquerors
of countries and provinces give them their laws, so they give them their
language’ passim como os vencedores de terras e provtncias Ihes dao leis em que
vivam, assim Ihes dao lingua que falem), citing the case of Portuguese in
Ethiopia and India.30
The analogy or connection between language and empire had become
a topos. A speaker in Claudio Tolomei’s dialogue on Tuscan had already
regretted the lack of a Tuscan empire that would allow the language would
spread in the way that Latin had done. The topos was particularly common,
as well as appropriate, in the case of Spanish, and a number of writers echoed
one another in describing the language as following the flag, accompanying
the banners of the armies. Giovanni Botero, an Italian writer on politics
with a global vision, added the examples of the Arabs, Aztecs and Incas. As
the French Jesuit Dominique Bouhours put it a century later, ‘Les langues
ont leur naissance, leur progress, leur perfection et meme leur decadence,
comme les empires’.31
This imperial topos was linked to the ancient idea that everything on
earth goes through a sequence of stages, from beginning to end, or from
childhood to old age. ‘Ont les langues comme toutes choses humaines’,
wrote the French scholar Louis Le Roy, ‘commencement, progres, per¬
fection, corruption, fin’. The Swedish poet-scholar Georg Stiernhielm
concurred: ‘Together with people, languages appear, change, differentiate
George J. Metcalf, ‘ The Indo-European Hypothesis in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries’,
in Dell Hymes (ed.), Studies in the History of Linguistics (Bloomington, 1974), pp. 241-4, 249-
51; Daniel Droixhe, La linguistique et I'appel de I’histoire (1600-1800) (Geneva and Paris, 1978),
pp. 53-60, 118-26.
29 Aldrete, Origen, p. 185. 30 Nunes de Leao, Origem, pp. 189—329, at p. 195.
31 Guillermo L. Guitarte, ‘La dimension imperial del espanol en la obra de Aldrete’, in Antonio Quilis
and Hans-Juergen Niederehe (eds.), The History of Linguistics in Spain (Amsterdam and Philadelphia,
1986), pp. 129-81; Dominique Bouhours, Entretiens d'Ariste et d'Eugene {1671: newed., Paris, 1962),
p. 67.

## 23
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
themselves, grow up, become mature and die (Cum hominibus oriuntur,
mutantur, differuntur, adolescunt, exolescunt, occidunt linguae'). Stiernhielm
also made the point that over time some dialects develop into languages,
while some languages fragment into dialects.32
Some writers told the story of change in terms of the improvement or
refinement of the language. The poet John Dryden, for instance, believed
that English was improving in his day. However, a more common expla¬
nation for linguistic change was in terms of corruption. Unlike Dryden,
Jonathan Swiff believed that English had been in decline since the mid¬
dle of the seventeenth century (more exactly, since 1642). Earthly lan¬
guages were viewed as corruptions of the original language of paradise.
More recent changes were described as the corruption of an originally
pure language by the influx of foreign words (below, pp. i4iff.). Cardinal
Castellesi, for instance, described the fourth and last period in the history
of Latin, the period after Cicero, as ‘imperfect and corrupt’. An English
writer on language, Edward Brerewood, summarizing earlier sixteenth-
century writers on the topic, suggested that Spanish, Italian and French
‘are but the Latin depraved and corrupted by the inundation of the Goths
and Vandals’.33 Nunes de Leao made the same point about Portuguese,
while the printer Jan Malecki argued that Polish was a corruption of
## Czech.34
Historians of language, such as Borghini or Stiernhielm, took a particular
interest in rustic speech — in one case in Tuscany, in the other in Dalarna -
on the grounds that, as Borghini remarked, ‘since the peasants converse
less with foreigners’ (perche i contadini conversd.no manco con forestieri),
they must have preserved archaic or pure forms of language, just as they
preserved old customs in general. The Icelandic scholar Arngrimur Jonsson
also explained the purity of his native language by his country’s isolation.35
The German polymath Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, a major figure in the
history of linguistics as well as in philosophy, mathematics and sinology,
made the point in a general way in a letter to a Swedish correspondent:
‘Swedish is to us in some manner what Icelandic is to you, for the more
remote the regions, the better they preserve ancient languages’ (Le suedois
32 Louis Le Roy, Vicissitudes (Paris, 1575), book 2: Georg Stiernhielm (ed.), Evangelia ab Ulfila
(Stockholm, 1671), folio C.3, recto.
33 Edward Brerewood, Enquiries Touching the Diversity of Language (London, 1614), preface.
34 Nunes de Leao, Origem, pp. 217, 219, 314; Irena Mamcarz, ‘Alcuni aspetti della questione della lingua
in Polonia nel ’500’, in Riccardo Picchio (ed.), Studi sulla questione della linguapresso gli slavi (Rome,
1972), pp. 279-326, at p. 295.
35 Borghini, Scritti, pp. 139—42; Stiernhielm, Evangelia, folio B.3, recto; Jonsson discussed in Pierre
Halleux, ‘Le purisme islandais’, Etudes Germaniques 20 (1965), pp. 417—27, at p. 418.

24 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
nous est en quelque fa<;on ce que I’islandois est a votre egard. Car plus les pays
sont recules, et mieux conservent ils les anciennes longues)/'
The comparative approach
The comparative approach to language advocated and pursued by Leibniz
was a major feature of early modern scholarship. Changes in language were
linked to the corruption of customs in the ambitious comparative histories
by Louis Le Roy, the Vicissitudes (1575), and by Claude Duret, the Thresor
(1613). Le Roy took as his theme ‘the variety of things in the universe’,
and especially the rise and fall of civilizations (discussing the vicissitudes
of languages in book 2), while Duret’s book concentrated on languages
and their ‘decadences, mutations, changes, conversions and ruins’.3' In
similar fashion, the English clergyman John Wilkins, in his scheme for a
‘universal language’, declared that ‘every change is a gradual corruption’.^
More optimistic, Borghini described Italian as increasingly polished from
Dante’s time onwards, while Bouhours suggested that the polishing of
language and the polishing of manners occurred together, as in the case of
French from the fifteenth century onwards.39
Comparative studies also led to increasing interest in the division of lan¬
guages into ‘families’ and the analysis of their ‘affinities’ or descent. Thus
Guillaume Postel, who taught oriental languages in Paris, and Theodor
Bibliander, professor ol Hebrew at Zurich, were among the first to demon¬
strate a series of similarities between Semitic languages, including Hebrew
and Arabic (though these languages had already been compared in more
general terms in the eleventh century, if not before). The Dutchman
Abraham Mylius discussed the history of the Germanic languages in his
Lingua belgica (1612).40 A Slovene grammar ol 1584 by the schoolmaster
Adam Bohoric claimed to be introducing the reader at the same time to
Russian, Ruthenian, Polish, ‘Bohemian’ (Czech), ‘Lusatian’ (Sorb), Croat
and Dalmatian, in other words to what is now known as the Slavonic or
Slavic family ol languages.
Again, the histories of Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and French dis¬
cussed earlier dealt with the romance languages as a family ol idioms that
Leibniz to Sparfvenfelt, 1695, quoted in Sigfrid von der Schulenburg, Leibniz als Sprachforscher
(Frankfurt, 1973), p. 206.
37 Dubois, Mythe, pp. 115-16.
1,3 John Wilkins, Essay toward a Real Character and a Philosophical Language (London, 1668), p. 8.
39 Borghini, Scritti, p. 184; Bouhours, Entretiens, pp. 73—5.
40 George J. Metcalf, ‘Abraham Mylius on Historical Linguistics’, Publications of the Modern Language
Association 68 (1953), pp. 535—54.

The discovery of language in early modern Europe 25
all descended from Latin. Tuscan, Castilian and Provencal were sisters’,
according to Borghini. Latin was the ‘mother’ of French, Spanish and
Italian, according to Bouhours. In similar fashion, according to Stiernhielm,
German and Swedish were ‘two legitimate sisters born of the first primeval
Japhetic-Scythian mother’.41 Some scholars took the family analogy seri¬
ously as a hypothesis for research. The English scholar George Hickes was
a student of what he called the ‘northern’ or, as we would say, the Germanic
languages, writing on Anglo-Saxon and Gothic and editing a grammar of
Icelandic. Leibniz took a keen interest in the Celtic languages, including
Cornish, while the Welsh antiquarian Edward Llwyd made a comparative
analysis of Celtic vocabulary, following a tour in search of manuscripts
which lasted from 1697 to 1701 and took him to Wales, Scotland, Ireland
and even Brittany (where he was suspected of being a spy).42
Still more ambitious, combining a historical with a comparative and a
structural analysis, the British Indologist Sir William Jones claimed that
the Greek, Latin, Persian, Germanic and Celtic languages belonged to the
‘family’ of Sanskrit (it was only in the nineteenth century that the Slavonic
languages would be added to this ‘Indo-European’ group). Outside the
Indo-European orbit, the Hungarian scholar Janos Sajnovics noticed the
affinity between Sami and Hungarian when he was in northern Norway
in 1769 as part of an expedition of astronomers, while at the very end of
the eighteenth century, Samuel Gyarmathi demonstrated the links between
Hungarian and Finnish that earlier scholars, including Leibniz, had already
suspected.43
## 2. LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY
The interest in the changes in one language in different periods was linked
to a concern with the diversity of languages or varieties of language spoken
in different places or by different kinds of people. In an age of expan¬
sion, in which Europeans discovered, explored, conquered and colonized
so many parts of the world, they were forced to become much more aware
41 Borghini, Scritti, p. 177; Bouhours, Entretiens, p. 45; Stiernhielm, quoted in Einar Haugen, The
Scandinavian Languages: an Introduction to their History (London, 1976), p. 422.
42 Edward Llwyd, Archaeologia Britannica (London, 1707), preface.
43 Hans AarslefF, ‘Sir William Jones and the New Philology’, in The Study of Language in England,
r/80-1860 (Princeton, 1967), pp. 115-61; Mikl6s Zsirai, ‘Samuel Gyarmathi, Hungarian Pioneer of
Comparative Linguistics’ (1951: repr. Thomas Sebeok (ed.), Portraits of Linguists, 2 vols., Blooming¬
ton, 1966), vol. 1, pp. 58-70; Daniel Droixhe, ‘Leibniz et le finno-ougrien’, in Tullio De Mauro
and Lia Formigari (eds.), Leibniz, Humboldt and the Origins of Comparativism (Amsterdam and
Philadelphia, 1990), pp. 3—29.

26 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
of the number and variety of human languages. Antonio Pigafetta, for
instance, in his account of Magellan’s famous voyage round the world
(1519-22), recorded some words from a number of exotic languages, from
the Moluccas to the giants of Patagonia.44 Jacques Cartier, or a companion
on his expedition to New France in the 1530s, compiled a vocabulary of the
Mohawk and Iroquois languages. Jean de Lery did the same for Tupi in the
course of his stay in Brazil. Missionaries in the New World and elsewhere
studied the local languages (below, p. 92), and in 1629 a Spanish Carmelite,
Vazquez de Espinosa, commented on the American Babel, ‘the confusion
and diversity of languages in the Indies’.
In short, the number of languages known to Europeans increased steadily
between Columbus’s landfall in 1492 and 1786, the year of the publica¬
tion in St Petersburg of the first volume of a dictionary of all the lan¬
guages of the world, Linguarum totius orbis vocabularia, commissioned by
Catherine the Great, a ruler of a multilingual empire, who had begun by
attempting to discover how many languages were spoken in her extensive
domains.45
This topic, fascinating as it is, will not be discussed further here. Fol¬
lowing the main theme of the book, the relation between languages and
communities, this section is primarily concerned with the rise of an interest
which we would describe today as ‘sociolinguistic’. One of the many reasons
for the growing interest in the diversity of languages was the belief that they
revealed the nature of the speakers. Ben Jonson made the essential point in
epigrammatic form when he declared (following Socrates) that ‘Language
most shows a man: speak that I may see thee. No glass renders a man’s form
or likeness as true as his speech’.46 Like other playwrights of the period,
Jonson exploited this diversity for comic effect, as we shall see.
The discussion of the merits and defects of different languages was linked
to the international debate on national character, as well as to the compe¬
tition between vernaculars (to be discussed below, pp. 7offi). Thus the
Italian humanist Giovanni Pontano declared that ‘Boastful speech delights
the Spaniards, colourful and complicated language the Greeks; the con¬
versation of the Romans was grave, that of the Spartans brief and rough,
of the Athenians fulsome and stilted, of the Carthaginians and Africans
shrewd and dry’ (Magniloquentia delectat Hispanos, fiucatus et compositus
sermo Graecos, Rornanorum gravis fuit oratio, Lacedaemoniorum brevis et
44 Maria Leonor Carvalhao Buescu, 0 estudo das linguas exoticas no seculo xvi (Lisbon, 1983), pp. 46—9.
45 Mary R. Key, Catherine the Great's Linguistic Contribution (Carbondale and Edmonton, 1980).
46 Ben Jonson, limber or Discoveries (1641: ed. Ralph S. Walker, Syracuse, 1953), pp. 45—6. Cf. Nunes
de Leao, Ortografia (Lisbon, 1576), the dedication.

## 27
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
horrida, Atheniensium multa et studiosa, et Carthaginensium Afrorumque
callida et safra) ,47
The French lawyer Etienne Pasquier described ‘the arrogant Spaniard’ as
‘creating a proud and ceremonious vernacular’, while ‘the Italians, having
degenerated from ancient Roman virtue’ produced ‘a soft and effeminate’
one.48 A once-celebrated comparison and contrast between the Spaniards
and the French declared that ‘The French generally speak much and loudly,
while the Spaniards always speak little and low’ {Losfranceses ordinariamente
hablan mucho y alto, y los espanoles siempre hablan poco y bajo)A9 Bouhours
treated the gravity of Spanish and what he called the ‘coarseness’ of German
as symptoms of national character.50
A few writers argued for linguistic relativism. One speaker in the dialogue
by Speroni mentioned earlier declared: ‘I am convinced that all languages,
including Arabic and Indian as well as Latin and Greek, have the same
merit’ [lo ho per fermo, che le lingue d’ogni paese, cost TArabica e I’Indiana,
come la Romana e lAteniense, siano d'un medesimo valore)}1
A point more frequently made in the period is that every language has
its own distinctive qualities.52 As the Tuscan humanist Leonardo Bruni
put it, ‘Every language has its own perfection’ {Ciascuna lingua ha sua
perfezione). The German humanist Aventinus (Johann Thurmair) agreed,
writing that ‘each language has its own use and its special quality’ {ein
ietliche sprach hat ir aigne breach und besunder aigenschaft),53 In Poland,
Jan Seklucjan argued that ‘There are many properties in a given language
which it is difficult to express in another language with an equally important
word’.54
In France, the scholar-printer Etienne Dolet and the poets Joachim Du
Bellay and Jacques Peletier du Mans made similar points: ‘chacune langue
a ses proprietes’; ‘chaque langue a je ne spay quoy propre seulement a elle’;
‘les mots et manieres de parler sont particuliers aux nations’. Nunes de
Leao made a list of Portuguese words and phrases that he considered to be
47 Giovanni Pontano, De sermone, ed. Alessandra Mantovani (Rome, 2002), p. 78.
48 Quoted in Donald Kelley, Foundations of Modern Historical Thought (New York, 1970), pp. 279-80.
49 Carlos Garda, La oposicion y conjunction de los dos grandes luminares de la tierra, 0 la antipatia de
francesesy espanoles (1617: ed. Michel Bareau, Edmonton, 1979).
50 Bouhours, Entretiens, p. 41. 51 Speroni, Dialogo, p. 116.
51 Edward Stankiewicz, ‘The “Genius” of Language in Sixteenth-Century Linguistics’, in Horst
Geckeler et al. (eds.), Logos Semantikos (Berlin, 1981), vol. 1, pp. 177-89.
53 Quoted in Monika Rossing-Hager, ‘Kiichenlatein und Sprachpurismus im friihen 16. Jht’, in
Nikolaus Henkel and Nigel F. Palmer (ed sfLatein und Volkspracheim deutschen Mittelalter, 1100-1500
(Tubingen, 1992), pp. 360—86, at p. 361.
54 Quoted in Maria R. Mayenowa, ‘Aspects of the Language Question in Poland’, in Riccardo Picchio
and Harvey Goldblatt (eds.), Aspects, vol. 1, pp. 337-76, at p. 345.

## 28
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
untranslatable, among them the example - still quoted today - ot saudade
(more or less ‘yearning’ or nostalgia’).55
Particular languages had their own images, masculine or feminine. For
example, the idea that the Germanic languages were especially manly was a
commonplace. In his essay-oration On the Excellency of the English Tongue,
the English scholar-poet Richard Carew described what he called ‘Dutch’
(probably German) as ‘manlike’. The Welsh writer James Howell described
both German and English as masculine languages. John Dryden noted
the ‘masculine vigour’ of English and contrasted it with French. The poet
Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock described German as mannlich. Other lan¬
guages might also be described in this way on occasion: Montaigne, for
instance, called Gascon ‘un langage masle et militaire’, while the historian
Joao de Barros made a similar case for Portuguese, claiming that French
and Italian ‘seem more like women’s talk than a serious language for men’
(A francesa como a italiana mais paregem fala para mulheres que grave para
homems)f
Italian was often regarded as a feminine language. Pasquier’s remark about
it as ‘soft and effeminate’ has already been quoted.57 Klopstock described
Italian as soft and voluptuous.58 Voltaire agreed, describing Italian as a lan¬
guage that, thanks to the frequency of vowels, suits ‘la musique effeminee’,
while the French journalist Antoine Rivarol declared Italian to be presque
insupportable dans une bouche virile’.59
There is a famous anecdote about the linguistic abilities of Charles V
which tells us little about the emperor but a good deal about early modern
views of languages. In the earliest known version, the story claimed that the
emperor ‘used to say, that he spoke Spanish to his God, Italian to courtiers,
French to his ladies and German to his horse’. In variants of the story,
he speaks German to his enemies or to his soldiers, French to his friends,
Italian to ladies, and English to the birds. In the early version of the story,
French is presented as a female language, but in a later version, the female
language is Italian.
55 Etienne Dolet, La maniere de bien traduire (1540: repr. Paris, 1830), p. 15; Joachim Du Bellay,
Deffense et illustration de la languefrangaise (1549: ed. Jean-Charles Monferras, Geneva, 2001), book i,
chapter 5; Jacques Peletier du Mans, /. art poetique (1555: ed. Andr6 Boulanger, Paris, 1930), p. no;
Nunes de Leao, Origem, pp. 303-4.
'6 Joao de Barros, Didlogo (1540: ed. Luciana Stegnano Picchio, Modena, 1959), pp. 78-9.
57 Bouhours, Entretiens, p. 41.
sK Quoted in Joshua Fishman, Language in Sociocultural Change (New York, 1972), p. 65.
59 Voltaire quoted in Gianfranco Folena, Vitaliano in Europa: Esperienze linguistiche del Settecento
(Turin, 1983), p. 223; Antoine Rivarol, De I’universalite de la langue frangaise (1786: ed. T. Suran,
Paris, 1930), p. 197.

## 29
The discovery of Language in early modern Europe
This story not only illustrates the tradition of the blason, the genre
in which one group - more or less playfully - insults others, but also
introduces the idea ofwhat linguists now call a ‘speech domain’ (above, p. 7).
A similar point was made in less picturesque fashion by the seventeenth-
century Scottish lawyer Sir George Mackenzie, when he declared that ‘the
English is fit for haranguing, the French for complimenting, but the Scots
for pleading’.60
There is nothing like conflict for encouraging consciousness. The grow¬
ing awareness of diversity within a given language was linked to campaigns
for standardization and debates about the standard, to what is known in
Italian as ‘the language question’ (la questione della lingua), to be discussed
in chapter 4 below. Standard languages were defined by the standardizers in
contrast to dialects and jargons, but writers who consciously chose dialect,
in seventeenth-century Italy for example, often did so in deliberate oppo¬
sition to the literary norm. From this point of view, each form of language
needed the other.
## Sociolects
The point on which I should most like to insist in this chapter is that ‘soci¬
olects’, the distinctive languages of particular social groups, were already
attracting attention at this time. ‘In every language’, wrote the Spaniard
Martin Viziana, ‘there are three ways of speaking (maneras de hablar), those
of the scholars, the nobles and the common people’. Another Spaniard, the
scholarly friar Luis de Leon, distinguished the language of what he called
‘the wise and the dignified’ {los sabiosy los graves) from that of‘the humble
and simple’ {los humildesy simples). In similar fashion, Bernardo de Aldrete
noted the diversity of Spanish modos de hablar, varying between the city
and the country as well as according to the region.61
The linguistic hierarchy reflected or sustained the social hierarchy. In his
history of Portuguese, Nunes de Leao provided a list of terms that ‘polite
people {os polidos) should not use’, such as ‘dance’ {dantpa) for ‘business’
or dissingular instead of the correct dissimular (‘hide’), associating these
banned words with ‘plebeians and simple people’ {osplebeus ou idiotas).61
60 Harald Weinrich, ‘Sprachanekdoten um Karl V’ (1980: repr. Wege der Sprachkultur (Stuttgart, 1985),
pp. 181-92); Mackenzie quoted in Peter Giles, 'Dialect in Literature’, in The Scottish Tongue (London,
1924), pp. 91-123, at p. 113.
61 Martin Viziana, Libro de alabanfos de las lenguas castellanay valenciana (Valencia, 1574), folio B.ii,
verso; Luis de Le6n quoted in Amado Alonso, Castellano, espahol, idioma nacional (Buenos Aires,
1938), p. 87; Aldrete, Origen, p. 192.
62 Nunes de Leao, Origem, pp. 295-6.

30 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In France, the famous Remarques (1647) by Claude de Vaugelas (discussed
below, p. 99) were concerned with distinguishing what the author called la
fagon deparler and la fagon d’escrire of the court and the upper classes from
that of the rest of the country.
Particular interest was taken in the language of peasants, not because
linguists admired its purity but because urban readers found it exotic. For
example, a number of poems and dialogues in Italian dialects were described
on their title-pages as written in ‘rustic language’ (lingua rustica, lingua vil-
lanesca1), including a dialogue written by Galileo in which two peasants
from the Padua area discussed the appearance of a new star. Plays, such as
those written by Angelo Ruzzante in northern Italy, or by Gil Vicente in
Portugal, showed peasants speaking differently from the other characters,
using the archaic word samica (‘certainly’) in Portuguese, for instance.63
The difference between rustics and town-dwellers was one of accent as well
as vocabulary, as more than one observer noted. The English schoolmaster
John Palsgrave claimed that French peasants did not stress their words.64
James Flowed, travelling in France in the mid-seventeenth century, noted a
rather different characteristic of peasant speech, ‘a whining kind of queru¬
lous tone’, which he explained in terms of‘the pitiful subjection they are
brought unto’.
The language of other social groups was also studied and imitated. For
example, the sixteenth-century Venetian playwright Andrea Calmo wrote
a sonnet in what he called lingua nicolota, in other words the speech of the
fishermen who lived near the church of San Niccolo in Venice. In similar
fashion, the goldsmith Alessandro Caravia wrote a mock-epic poem, La
verra antiga (1550) in what he called lengua brava, the language of tough
guys, in this case the rival communities of fishermen and boat-builders,
who engaged in regular fist-fights on the bridges of Venice. The title of the
poem may be translated as ‘the ancient war’, the dialect form verra replacing
the normal Italian guerra.
An object of special interest was the jargon or ‘cant’ of the community
of beggars and thieves, with its overtones of secrecy and the exotic. This
jargon was sometimes employed by poets, like the Pole Sebastian Klonowicz
in Worek Judaszow (‘Judas’s Bag’, 1600). Already in the fifteenth century
the French poet Francis Villon had written six ballades in thieves’ jargon,
while the Italian poet Luigi Pulci made a glossary of its Italian equivalent,
and a vocabulary of Rotwelsch or beggar’s German was compiled in 1479. A
6t Paul Icyssicr, La langue de Gil Vicente (Paris, 1959), pp. 76—171, at pp. 84—5.
f’4 Gabriele Stein, John Palsgrave as Renaissance Linguist (Oxford, 1997), pp. 379-81.

## 3i
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
number of vocabularies of this jargon in different languages were printed in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, including the Italian Nuovo modo
de intendere la lingua zerga (1545), the Dutch Fielten Vocabulaer (1563), the
English Caveat for Common Cursitors (1566) and the French Jargon de I’argot
reforme (1628).65
The language of the bourgeoisie also attracted the attention of satirists
because of the place of language in strategies for social mobility, or at least
in attempts at passing for noble. In the 1930s the socialite Nancy Mitford
and the linguist Alan Ross, by distinguishing upper-class usage from the
rest (‘U’ from ‘non-U’), had made the English middle class anxious about
their language. Over four hundred years earlier, however, the satirist Pietro
Aretino had written a dialogue set in a Roman brothel, in which one of the
whores is mocked for her linguistic affectations, calling a window a balcone
instead of the common finestra, a door uscio instead of porta, a face viso
instead offaccia and so on.66
In France, what was called la fagon deparler en bourgeois was already stig¬
matized in 1616.67 Vaugelas, one of the most influential writers on French,
criticized some of the Parisians of his day for pronouncing commencer as
if it were quemencer and bureau as if it were burreau.6h Antoine Furetiere,
later the compiler of a famous French dictionary, published a novel in
1666 with the title Le roman bourgeois. In this satire on the Parisians of his
day, Furetiere introduces us to a young abbe who spoke in an affected way
because he thought it made him appear to be of higher status, or more
literally affected to speak in a slightly oily manner, so that his language
would be more dainty’ (ajfectoit de parler un peu gras, pour avoir le langage
plus mignard) J9
Fashions in language, from the ‘jargon’ of the younger courtiers to fagons
de parler bourgeoises, were also stigmatized by the diplomat Francois de
Callieres in his book Des mots a la mode (1692). Among these bad bourgeois
habits were referring to the fruit course as dessert, soup as soupe (rather than
potage), and a chambermaid as une file de chambre (rather than femme de
chambre). By this time even the word courtois was banned from high society:
the right adjective to use was bonneted0
65 Peter Burke, ‘Introduction’, in Burke and Roy Porter (eds.), Languages and Jargons (Cambridge,
## 1995). PP- 5> 18.
66 Pietro Aretino, Sei Giornate, ed. Giovanni Aquilecchia (Bari, 1975), p. 82.
67 Le Savatier (1616) quoted in Ferdinand Brunot, Languefranfaise, vol. in, 1600-60, p. 165m
68 Claude de Vaugelas, Remarques sur la languefran^aise (Paris, 1647), p. 425.
Antoine Furetiere, Le roman bourgeois (1666), repr. in Antoine Adam (ed.), Romanciers du lye siecle
(Paris, 1968), p. 906.
70 Franfois de CallRres, Des mots d La mode (Paris 1692), pp. 43, 65.

32 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In Germany in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, people with
social aspirations liked to use French words and phrases (below, p. 139,
pp. i5off.)- The writer Johann Christoph Gottsched gave an explanation
of the affected, Frenchified language of the upper classes in his time that
is reminiscent of the social theory of the late Pierre Bourdieu: ‘One has to
distinguish oneself from the mob even in the way one speaks’ (.Man muss
sich von der Canaille auch en parlant distinguiren) 7' The ideas of an earlier
sociologist, Thorstein Veblen, are also apposite at this point. Like the long
fingernails of Chinese mandarins, speaking a foreign language in public is
a sign of belonging to what Veblen called a ‘leisure class’, a group that has
the time to devote to pursuits that are not necessary for survival. 2
Language and religion
The social groups identifiable by their language included religious groups.
Latin was sometimes unkindly described in late medieval France as clerquois,
the jargon or dialect ol the clergy.73 In his Confessions, Jean-Jacques Rousseau
described the drawl of the nuns he had known as le ton lent et trainant
des religieuses. The language of French Protestants, impregnated as it was
with phrases from the translation of the Old Testament, was sometimes
described as ‘the dialect of the Promised Land’ (le patois de Canaan-, below,
p. 105). Eighteenth-century German Pietists were supposed to speak in a
‘whimpering’, ‘whining’ or ‘sighing’ manner, as well as employing distinc¬
tive turns of phrase, such as ‘the fullness of the heart’ (Fiille des Herzens).
In the Dutch Republic, where the Pietist movement was also strong, its
supporters could be identified by their regular use of diminutives, a habit
that remains audible in the Netherlands to this day.74
In England, the speech habits of the Quakers made them distinctive,
including their use of terms such as ‘steeple-house’ (to describe a church),
or ‘meeting’ (to describe their religious services), their practice of saying
‘thou’ to everyone, even to their social superiors, and the important func¬
tion of silence in their worship. Puritans were also recognizable, like their
predecessors the Lollards, because they used a distinctive vocabulary, in
;i Quoted in Blackall, German, p. 94; et. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction (1979: English translation,
## London, 1984).
72 Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (New York, 1899). Cf. Robert A. Hall, Jr, ‘Thorstein
Veblen and Linguistic Theory’, American Speech 35 (i960), pp. 124-30.
73 Ferdinand Brunot, Langue franfaise, vol. 11, p. 15.
4 August Langer, Der Wortschatz des deutschen Pietismus (Tubingen, 1954); J. M. Bulloch, ‘The Delight
ol the Doric in the Diminutive , in William A. Craigie et al., The Scottish Tongue (1924), pp. 127—51,
at p. 132.

## 33
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
which terms such as ‘backsliding’, ‘godly’, ‘idol’, ‘saint’ and ‘zeal’ were
frequent (hence Ben Jonson’s creation of a comic puritan named ‘Zeal-of-
the-Land-Busy in his Bartholomew Fair). One of their opponents, Robert
Sanderson, referred to ‘That uncouth affected garb of speech, or canting
language’ of‘the godly party’,75 The godly also appear to have spoken with
distinctive accents, for a character in a play by Ben Jonson, Aurelia in The
Case is Altered (1609), uses the phrase, ‘learn to speak i’ the nose and turn
puritan’.76
It was to peculiarities of this kind that the diarist Samuel Pepys referred
when he recorded a visit to his old Cambridge college, Magdalene, on 25
February 1660. On meeting some of the fellows, Pepys remarked that ‘there
was nothing at all left of the old preciseness in their discourse’ (the Puritans
were nicknamed precisians’). Whether Pepys is referring to formality or
some other feature of Magdalene speech, the point is that the fellows realized
that Charles II was soon to return to England and so they no longer wished
to sound distinctive.
Language and gender
An awareness of the links between language and gender was not uncom¬
monly expressed in this period, though the texts usually take the form of
men criticizing the language of women by saying that they talk too much,
cannot spell, know no grammar, or speak in an affected manner. The
affected accents and ‘clipped pronunciation of some middle-class women
had already been the target of a satirist in the fourth century, St Jerome.
In the early sixteenth century, Erasmus, in some respects a new Jerome,
wrote a treatise on pronunciation, in which he placed the blame for the
disappearance of diphthongs on women, who thought it ladylike ‘to open
their mouths and move their lips as little as possible when forming their
words’.77
More specifically, Erasmus and the printer Geoffroy Tory both com¬
mented on the peculiarities ol the pronunciation of the ladies of Paris in
75 Richard Bauman, Let Your Words be Few: Symbolism of Speech and Silence among the Quakers
(Cambridge, 1983); Hugh Ormsby-Lennon, ‘From Shibboleth to Apocalypse: Quaker Speechways
during the Puritan Revolution’, in Burke and Porter, Language, Self pp. 72—112; Marinus van Beek,
An Enquiry into Puritan Vocabulary (Groningen, 1969); Sanderson quoted in Samuel Johnson’s
Dictionary (London, 1755), sub voce ‘cant’.
76 Patricia Fumerton, ‘Homely Accents: Ben Jonson Speaking Low’, in Fumerton and Simon Hunt
(eds.), Renaissance Culture and the Everyday (Philadelphia, i999)> PP- 97—nl-
77 Quoted in John N. D. Kelly, Jero me: his life, writings and controversies (London, 1975), p. 42; Erasmus,
‘On Pronunciation’ (1528: English translation in Works, vol. 26, Toronto, 1985), p. 403.

## 34
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
their time. Erasmus pointed to the substitution of S for R, ‘pronouncing
Maria as Masia and ma mere as ma m 'ese . In his Champfleury (1529), Tory
noted the replacement of A by E, as in the sentence ‘mon mery est a la
porte de Peris’. In the seventeenth century, the phrase je le I’ai, instead of
the more common je I’ai, was described as a distinctively female usage.
It was presumably of characteristics such as this that the due de Saint-
Simon was thinking when he wrote that the Marechal de Tesse avoit le
jargon des femmes. That sharp observer of the court of Louis XIV kept his
ears as well as his eyes wide open and condemned one duchess for having
‘the intonation and the accent and some of the vocabulary of the common
people’ {le ton et la voix et des mots du baspeuple).?H
In England, the humanist Sir Thomas Elyot castigated ‘foolish’ women
who omitted letters or syllables. An Elizabethan Englishman claimed that
‘whereas commonly in all countries the women speak most neatly’ - is this
the first formulation of the idea of female hypercorrectness? - in Ireland
they spoke ‘so peevishly and faintly as though they were half sick and
ready to call for a posset’.79 A seventeenth-century headmaster of St Paul’s
school in London, Alexander Gill, criticized the affected language of some
London women he called the ‘Mopsae’, after an ignorant and affected
woman in Sir Philip Sidney’s Arcadia. Jonathan Swift noted differences
in the corruption of pronunciation by women and by men: women ‘do
naturally discard the consonants, as we do the vowels’. Samuel Johnson
noted some characteristically female expressions in his Dictionary, including
‘frightful’, defined as ‘a cant word among women for anything unpleasing’,
and ‘horrid’, defined as ‘shocking; offensive; unpleasing: in womens cant'.So
A generation later, Johnson might have included ‘nice’ in the sense of
‘delightful’, a usage first recorded in 1796 in texts by two ladies (Jane Austen
and a certain Miss Carter).
Learned ladies were a particular target of male satirists. The Spanish
writer Francisco de Quevedo made fun of a social type that he called the
‘female latinist’ (hembrilatina), who called her husband mi quotidie (‘my
everyday’), referred to a fright as estupor rather than the normal espanto,
78 Francois de Callieres, Du bon et du mauvais usage (1693: repr. Geneva, 1972), p. 136; Louis de
Saint-Simon, Memoires, ed. Yves Coirault (8 vols., Paris, 1983—8), vol. 1, p. 589, vol. 2, p. 306.
79 Quoted in Manfred Gorlach, Introduction to Early Modern English (1978: English translation,
Cambridge, 1991), pp. 17-18, 383.
80 Quoted in Blank, Broken English, p. 39. See also Juliet Fleming, 'Dictionary English and the Female
longue’, in Jean Brink (ed.), Privileging Gender in Early Modern England (Kirksville, 1993), pp. 175—
204; Manfred Gorlach, ‘Regional and Social Variation’, in Roger Lass (ed.), The Cambridge History
of the English Language, vol. in, 1476-1776 (Cambridge, 1999), pp. 459-538, and Linda C. Mitchell,
Grammar Wars: Language as cultural battlefield in 17th- and 18th-century England (Aldershot, 2001),
pp. 141-53.

The discovery of language in early modern Europe
## 35
sadness as mestizia rather than tristeza, stupidities as supinidades rather than
ignorancias, and so on.8’ A generation later, Moliere’s Precieuses Ridicules
(1659) formed part of a cluster of satires against a group of French ladies,
who were equally notorious for their speech habits.
This group introduced neologisms such as elegance and merite - words
that have passed into the language, thus blunting the point of the satire for
modern readers. They used the adverbs terriblement and alsofurieusement to
mean Very much’, thus anticipating the ‘womens cant’ condemned by Dr
Johnson. They referred to themselves as ‘one’ instead of T, and employed
euphemisms for ‘bed’ and ‘chamber-pot’ and other circumlocutions, such
as calling a mirror ‘the counsellor of the graces’ (le conseiller des graces). The
satirists took this practice seriously, but it is difficult to avoid wondering
whether there was not a playful element in these linguistic experiments.
Despite their authors’ lack of sympathy for the precieuses, this cluster of
satires against them, including poems, plays and a dictionary, offers the most
sustained account of the sociolect of a group of women in the whole early
modern period, described at the time as their ‘jargon’, ‘virtually a language
of their own’ (quasi une langue particuliere). The use of euphemisms as a
sign of female modesty fits well with what is known of women’s language
in other places and periods.82
More positive views of women’s language were expressed by some men.
Women might be complimented for their softer or more liquid speech. In
France, it was not uncommon to praise the speech of women for its politesse
and its nettete (clarity or purity). Vaugelas, who frequented the famous salon
of Madame de Rambouillet in Paris, specifically included women in the
group whose language he took as normative. The critic Jean Chapelain
argued that social intercourse between the sexes helped make languages
more polished - or polite - Irendre les languespolies), because women natu¬
rally speak in a softer way and so in talking to women, ‘men learn to make
their pronunciation less harsh’ (adoucir la rudesse de la pronunciation) .83
## Dialects
An awareness of the different ways in which the same language was spo¬
ken in different regions goes back a long way. The term ‘dialect’ is derived
81 Francisco de Quevedo, ‘La culta latiniparla’ (c. 1626) in his Obras en Prosa (Madrid, 1941), pp. 786-90.
82 From a linguistic point of view the best edition of Moli£re’s play is surely Micheline Cuenin (ed.),
Les Precieuses Ridicules (Geneva, 1973). See also Antoine Baudeau de Somaize, Leprocez despretieuses,
ed. Elisa Biancardi (Rome, 1980), and Roger LathuilRre, La prhiosite (Geneva, 1966), especially
pp. 143-57 and pp. 180-200.
83 Jean Chapelain, Lettres, vol. 11 (Paris, 1883), p. 169.

## 36
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
from Greek and the model situation was that of ancient Greece with its
Ionic, Doric, Attic and other varieties of speech. The growing interest in
regional dialects in the early modern period may be linked to the redis¬
covery of ancient Greece. One sign of this interest is the increasing use
of the word ‘dialect’, in Latin in the early sixteenth century, for instance,
in French from 1563 at the latest and in English from 1577. Luther, for
example, remarked - in the mixed language he employed in his table-talk -
that ‘Germany has dialects of many kinds’ (Deutschland hat mancherley
## Dialectos).
In an age of increasing linguistic standardization (below, p. 89), dis¬
cussions by townspeople expressed the same contempt for rural dialect as
for the ‘boors’ who spoke it. French definitions of patois were pejorative,
notably that of Antoine FuretRre in his famous Dictionary (1690), ‘corrupt
and crude language, such as that of the lower orders’ (langage corrompu et
grossier, tel que celui du menu peuple). The Englishman Randle Cotgrave
had already glossed the term patois in his French-English Dictionary (1611)
as ‘gibridge’ (gibberish), ‘clownish language’ or ‘rusticall speech’. Alexan¬
der Gill, distinguishing northern, southern, eastern and western forms of
English, simply remarked that the western is ‘the most barbarous’. The
statutes of the Deutsche Gesellschaft proscribed what were called ‘provin¬
cial forms of speech’ (.Provinzial-Redensarten) D
The playwrights, who anticipated the scholars in their interest in dialects
(as in other sociolects), encouraged contemptuous or patronizing atti¬
tudes to these provincial forms by employing them for comic effect. In
the Italian commedia dell’arte, for instance, Pantalone, the heavy lather,
speaks Venetian and Graziano, the pedant, Bolognese, while Capitano, the
boastful and cowardly soldier, speaks Neapolitan, sometimes laced with
Spanish.85 Shakespeare’s Henry V includes a stage Welshman, Fluellen,
a stage Scot, Jamy, and a stage Irishman, Macmorris, all identified by
their speech. Jonson’s Bartholomew Fair mocks the accents of the north
(‘northern’) and the west (‘puppy’). Stage west-countrymen in particu¬
lar became a staple of English comedy in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries.
All the same, there is evidence ol more positive attitudes to dialect in
this period, especially towards its end. In Italy, lor instance, the literature
in support of vernacular languages (below, p. 65) included texts praising
Milanese (1606), Bolognese (1622) and Neapolitan (1662). A number of
H'( Alexander Gill, Logonomia anglica (1619: ed. and trans. Bror Danielsson and Arvid Gabrielson,
Stockholm, 1972); the Deutsche Gesellschaft quoted in Blackall, German, p. 107.
K' Ivano Paccagnella, Ilfasto delle lingue:plurilinguismo letterario net 'soo (Rome, 1984).

## 37
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
literary texts in the standard language were translated into various dialects.
In the case of the catechism of the Jesuit Roberto Bellarmino, which was
translated into the dialect of Turin in 1738, Sicily in 1744, and Friuli in
i745> the motive was obviously to reach ordinary people by speaking their
language, part of the Jesuit missionary policy of accommodation to local
customs. The Jesuits in Sardinia used Sardinian on the grounds that, as one
of them put it — in Spanish — in 1561, ‘the ordinary language of Sardinia
is Sarda just as that of Italy is Italian’ (la lengua ordinaria de Cerdena es la
sarda como de Italia la i tali ana) ,H('
More difficult to interpret are the translations of literary classics such as
Ludovico Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso, Giambattista Guarini’s Pastor Fido and
Torquato Tasso’s Gerusalemme Liberata, into Bergamask, for instance, or
Neapolitan. Today, it is not easy to say whether these translations were made
out of playfulness or to show off the ingenuity of the translators or whether
they also expressed, as is likely to have been the case, a reaction against
standardization and a sense of regional identity, all the stronger because the
peninsula was not politically united. As in ancient Greece, there was a link
between local dialects and local autonomy.
It is worth noting that the Italian fashion for dialect in print did not
please everyone. A translation of the Liberata into Bolognese published in
1628 was left unfinished, the colophon informing readers that the munic¬
ipal government had forbidden it to be continued, ‘since the idiom was
somewhat ridiculous’ (I’idioma sendo un poco ridicolo).8y
After 1650, on the other hand, dialect was rediscovered, or at least
revalued. A number of scholars compiled and published dictionaries of
dialect, usually from their own region. Once again, the Italians were in
the vanguard of the movement with dictionaries of Bolognese (1660) and
Venetian (1671), though in 1674 the Cambridge don John Ray published his
Collection of English Words, a glossary of dialect terms that was doubtless
inspired by his botanical researches (given the variety of local names for
plants) but became much more ambitious in the course of its compilation.88
Since it was with Ray that Philip Skippon (above, p. 11) travelled to Italy,
86 Quoted in Raimondo Turtas, ‘La questione linguistica nei college gesuitici nella Sardegna nella
seconda meti del Cinquecento’, Quaderni sardi di storia 2 (1981), 55-86, at 6in.
87 Contrast Benedetto Croce, ‘La letteratura dialettale riflessa’, Uomini e cose della vecchia Italia,
vol. 1 (Bari, 1926), pp. 222-34, emphasizing playfulness, with W. Theodor Elwert (1939) ‘Die
mundartlichen Kunstdichtung Italiens und ihr Verhaltnis zur Literatur in der Hochsprache’ (1939:
repr. Aufsdtze zur italienischen Lyrik, Wiesbaden 1967, pp. 156-91), emphasizing politics.
88 Jo Gladstone, “‘New World of English Words”: John Ray, FRS, the Dialect Protagonist, in the
Context of his Times’, in Peter Burke and Roy Porter (eds.), Language, Self and Society (Cambridge,
1991), pp. 115-53.

38 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
we may surmise that his fascinating observations on spoken Italian owed
something to his tutor.
In the German-speaking world, Leibniz took a great interest in dialect,
as in other forms of language, and encouraged the researches of others into
the subject, though it was only in the eighteenth century that dictionaries
were published for the dialect of Hamburg, for instance, of Bremen and
of Bavaria. A Swedish dialect dictionary came out in 1766, and in France,
studies of the patois of the Limousin, Lorraine and Marseilles appeared in
the 1770s and 1780s.89
The high point of the investigation of dialect in this period comes at
its end, with the questionnaire designed by Henri Gregoire to produce a
map of dialect in France, paying particular attention to the contexts and
occasions of its use. Ironically enough, this language survey was carried out
not to support dialect but to destroy it.
Playwrights as witnesses
As we have already seen in the cases of Shakespeare, Jonson and Moliere,
playwrights exploited sociolects for comic effect, representing marginal
communities as funny foreigners who do not know how to speak. In
sixteenth-century Spain and Portugal, for instance, comic Jews, Gypsies,
Basques, Moors and Blacks all made their appearance on the stage. The
Gypsies, for instance, replace ‘o’ by ‘u’ and ‘s’ by ‘z’, as in the sentence
‘give us alms for the love of God’, Dadnuz limuzna pur la amur de Diuz.
The Jews say guai\ instead of‘Alas!’ and pronounce the dipthong ou as oi
(‘oiro’ for ouro, ‘poico’ for pouco and so on).90 As for the language of the
Africans, what the Spaniards called guineo and the Portuguese, lingua de
preto is represented by the use of‘me’ instead of T {mi vem la), and by the
use of R in the place of D or L, from Rios (‘God’) to diabro. The similarities
between the structure of this ‘Black Portuguese’ and what used to be called
‘Black English’ (now known as African-American English or AAE) suggest
that the evidence of these plays is fairly trustworthy (below, p. 126).91
8y Sigrid von der Schulenberg, ‘Leibnizens Gcdanken zur Erforschung der deutschen Mundarten’,
Abhandlungen des Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschafien (1937), pp. 3-37; Droixhe, La linguistic]ue,
## PP- 334-45-
90 Gil Vicente, ‘Farfa das ciganas’, and ‘Farfa de Ines Pereira , in Obras (3 vols., Coimbra, 1912—14),
vol. 2, pp. 318-46, and vol. 3, pp. 238-43. Cf. Teyssier, Gil Vicente, pp. 211, 220.
91 Edmund de Chasca, ‘The Phonology of the Speech of the Negroes in Early Spanish Drama’, Hispanic
Review 14 (1946), pp. 322-39; Teyssier, Gil Vicente, pp. 227-54; Elvezio Canonico-de Rochemonteix,
Elpoliglotismo en el teatro de Lope de Vega (Kassel, 1991).

## 39
The discovery of language in early modern Europe
Alternatively, a playwright might exploit the comic vein to comment on
language, like Moliere and Somaize in their satires on the precieuses. The
problem of circularity, of trying to assess the reliability of the satires yet
depending on them for virtually all our information, is a serious one. All the
same, the texts and the interest taken in them together reveal a widespread
awareness of social variations in language.
In the Dutch Republic, the Amsterdam poet Gerbrand Bredero’s most
successful play was The Spanish Brabanter (1617). The protagonist, a gentle¬
man who wears Spanish dress and is given the Spanish name Jerolimo, is also
an enthusiast for the dialect of Brabant, especially the form of the language
used in Antwerp, ‘splendid’ (heerloyck) and full of ‘perfection’ (perfeccy)
and ‘correctness’ (correccy). His servant, on the other hands, speaks broad
Amsterdam and mocks the language of his master, turning ‘Brabanters’ into
‘Brabbelaars’, in other words speakers of gibberish.
In this way, Bredero is able to strike at least two targets. His social target
is the emigrant from the southern Netherlands, who fails to recognize
that Amsterdam has overtaken Antwerp. His linguistic target, on the other
hand, is the humanist writer Hendrik Spieghel, whose book in praise of the
vernacular of the Netherlands (Nederduitsche or ‘Low German’, as he called
it), recommended the adoption of the dialect of Brabant as the standard.
Bredero was thus expressing the reaction of the Hollanders against the
linguistic hegemony of the south.92
In the eighteenth century, the playwright Ludvig Holberg, sometimes
described as the Danish Moliere (he came from Bergen in Norway but
wrote in Danish) had a sharp ear for sociolects. In his Erasmus Montanus
(1731), for instance, Holberg portrayed the son of a prosperous peasant
who comes back from university mixing his spoken and written Danish
with Latin words and phrases, something that was not uncommon at this
time, or at least a generation earlier (below, p. 131). Holberg also made
fun of pretentious people, who were replacing traditional Danish words
with foreign ones like Lakei (lackey) for ‘servant’, or Spillemand (from the
German Spielman) for ‘musician’.
At about the same time, Carlo Goldoni was noting the peculiarities of
the speech of Venice and the Veneto. For example, he tried in his Barujfe
chioggiote, as he remarks in the preface, to reproduce the unusual vocabulary
(termini particolari) and the accent (maniera di pronunziare) of the lower
classes of the small town of Chioggia.
92 Andries A. Verdenius, Bredero’s Dialectkunstals Hollandse Reaktie tegen zuidnederlandse taalhegemonie
(Groningen, 1933).

40 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
The importance of accent
An awareness that different communities spoke with different accents is
in no way new. After all, what gave St Peter away when he denied being
a follower of Christ was his Galilean accent. ‘Your speech betrays you’, he
was told (loquela tua manifestum te facit. Matthew, 26.73). All the same, it is
possible to document a growing preoccupation with accent in this period,
a growing stigmatization of departures from the new linguistic standards
in pronunciation as in vocabulary and syntax.
That the English were not the only people to worry about their accents
may be demonstrated from some French and Italian examples. In France,
the printer Henri Estienne (like his colleague Tory, whose remarks on
women’s accents were quoted above), mocked affected pronunciation, espe¬
cially those who said ‘chouse’ for ‘chose’, ‘j’ouse’ for ‘j’ose’, ‘troas moas’ for
‘trois mois’ and ‘la guarre’ for ‘la guerre’.93 In Spain, a French visitor noted
that the villagers of Castille said guevo instead of huevo, egg’, guente for
fuente, ‘stream’, and cablito for cabrito, ‘little goat’.
As for Italy, in Speroni’s dialogue on language, the Greek humanist
Janos Lascaris remarks on what he calls ‘certain unpleasant accents (certi
accenti . . . noiosi) associated with the common people, or, as he puts it,
gente vile. The rules drawn up for the seminary established in Milan in 1590
specified that the teachers should correct ‘the mispronunciations which the
pupils brought with them from their places of origin’ (vitiosas quasdam
inflexiones vocis . . . quas a patria secum extulerunt).94 Again, a seventeenth-
century account of the regions of Italy - written by a Bolognese — claimed
that the Genoese spoke with the tip of the tongue on the teeth, that the
Florentines swallowed their words, that the mouths of the Venetians were
full of vowels, and that the Milanese placed the stress on the last syllable
instead of the last but one (alcuni parlano con le labra, e con la punta della
lingua sii i denti, come i Genovesi: Alcuni ingorgano, come i Fiorentini: Altri
sono nel parlar tardi, e hanno le voci piene di vocali, come gli Venetiani . . .
I Milanesi . . . parlano con una certa fiacchezza e pongono molti accenti
nell’ultimo di molteparole).95
In England, perhaps predictably, social discrimination on the basis of
accent can be traced horn the time that the term ‘accent’ came into use in
93 Henri Estienne, Deux dialogues du nouveau langage franfois (1578: ed. Pauline M. Smith, Geneva,
## 1980).
94 Quoted in Adriano Prosperi, Tribunali di Coscienza (Turin, 1996), p. 314m
95 Camillo Baldi, Lettera missiva (Bologna, 1622), pp. 26, 30. On Milan, cf. the testimony of Skippon
(above, p. 11).

The discovery of language in early modern Europe
## 4i
the later sixteenth century, if not before. In 1562, for instance, the inspec¬
tors of Merchant Taylor’s school in London complained that the teachers,
'being northern men born’, had failed to teach the boys ‘to pronounce
their words as well as they ought’.96 George Puttenham, an Elizabethan
writer on the art of poetry, noted what he called the ‘strange accents’ of
the 'inferior sort’.97 When a student from Wales went up to St John’s
College Cambridge in 1598, it is recorded that ‘such as had giggling spleens
would laugh at him for his Welsh tone’.98 Again, an account of Suffolk
in the early seventeenth century noted the ‘disgrace of a broad or rude
accent’.99
Some individuals of high status still spoke in a manner that diverged from
the standard. Sir Walter Raleigh, although a leading courtier, ‘spake broad
Devonshire’, according to the seventeenth-century biographer John Aubrey
(it may well be a sign of changing standards that Aubrey drew attention
to this point). In the eighteenth century, at a time when spoken English
was increasingly standardized (below, p. 108), accents that diverged from
the norm were stigmatized even more sharply than before. In his Accidence
of the English Tongue (1724), the grammarian fiugh Jones referred to the
'odious tones’ of dialect. The Irish actor and elocution teacher Thomas
Sheridan emphasized the need to avoid ‘rusticity of accent’, arguing that
what he called 'the court pronunciation’ was ‘a sort of proof that a person
has kept good company’.100
These ideas or prejudices were not confined to theorists. In the 1760s,
an English clergyman, confiding to his diary the bad impression made on
him by the bishop of Lincoln, declared 'his humble education and mean
extraction’ to have been revealed by his ‘want of behaviour and manners’,
including in this category his ‘Yorkshire dialect’.101 If parents were spending
money on elocution lessons for their children, a good accent must have
appeared to be a social advantage.
The use of accent as a social shibboleth in Britain in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries has become notorious, thanks to a succession of
gifted novelists from Charles Dickens to Evelyn Waugh and beyond, the
successors as social observers of the playwrights discussed earlier in this
96 Quoted in Adam Fox, Oral and Literate Culture in England, 1700-1700 (Oxford, 2000), p. 59.
99 George Puttenham, The Arte of English Poesie (1588: ed. Gladys D. Willcock and Alice Walker,
Cambridge, 1936), p. 144.
98 Quoted in Geraint H. Jenkins (ed.), The Welsh Language before the Industrial Revolution (Cardiff,
## 1997). P- 3°i-
99 Quoted in Fox, Oral and Literate Culture, p. 101.
100 Thomas Sheridan, A Course of Lectures on Elocution (London, 1762), pp. 29-38.
101 William Cole, The Blecheley Diary (London, 1931), p. 35-

## 42
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
chapter.102 I hope to have shown that this phenomenon is neither as new
nor as peculiarly English as is often thought to be the case. Using the
'received pronunciation’ has been a strategy for maintaining or claiming
high status over the centuries.
An alternative strategy in the early modern period was to show off a
knowledge of Latin. The uses of Latin in the construction of communities
will be discussed in the following chapter.
102 Kenneth C. Phillipps, Language and Class in Victorian England (London, 1984); Lynda Mugglestone,
‘Talking Proper’: The Rise of Accent as Social Symbol (Oxford, 1995).

## CHAPTER 2
Latin: a language in search of a community
In the last chapter, we saw how some people objected to the employment
of Latin in church and in the courts because it excluded the majority
of the population from the community of interpretation.1 Here, by con¬
trast, the focus will be on inclusion, on the community or communities
whose cohesion was expressed, encouraged or constructed by the use of that
language.2
A discussion of Latin provides a good opportunity for noting conti¬
nuities between the early modern period and the Middle Ages, before
turning to the changes. In medieval and early modern times alike, Latin
offers a classic example of ‘diglossia’ (above, p. 7), in the sense that
it was considered appropriate to use that language in some situations
and domains. Rules become more visible when they are broken, so
that one of the traditional conventions for the use of Latin is revealed
when the sixteenth-century Polish Cardinal Stanislas Hosius chided a col¬
league, bishop Jakub Uchanski, for writing to him about theology in the
vernacular.3
The case of Latin also allows us to return to some of the problems that,
as we have seen (above, p. 5), the concept community’ brings in its train,
since by the ninth century, if not before, Latin had turned into a language
without native speakers. For this reason, post-classical Latin has been called
1 Stanley Fish, Is there a text in this class? The Authority of Interpretive Communities (Cambridge, MA,
## 1980).
1 General surveys include Jozef Ijsewijn, ‘Neolatin: a Historical Survey’, Helios 14 no. z (1987),
pp. 93-107; Bo Lindberg, De lardes modersmal (Goteborg, 1984) and Lindberg, Europa och
Latinet (Stockholm, 1993); Franfoise Waquet, Latin: the Empire of a Sign (1998: English transla¬
tion London, 2001). Cf. Peter Burke, ‘Heu Domine adsunt Turcae-. a Sketch for a Social History of
Post-medieval Latin’, in Burke and Roy Porter (eds.), Language, Self and Society (Cambridge, 1991),
pp. 23-50.
3 Claude Backvis, Quelques remarques sur le bilinguisme latino-polonais dans la Pologne du xvie silcle
(Brussels, 1958), p. 8n.
## 43

## 44
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
a language ‘without a people’ or ‘without a speech community’ {Eine Sprache
obne Sprachgemeinschaft) d
I should prefer to call Latin a language in search of a community. This
expression may sound as odd as Pirandello’s characters in search of an
author, but it makes the point that the search was ultimately successful.
Post-classical Latin, like the vernaculars, exemplifies the uses of language in
binding together a group. In this case, the people who were bound together
formed a ‘community of ideas’ or an ‘imagined community’ that was inter¬
national in scope. In the early modern period, Latin both expressed and
contributed to the cohesion of two international communities in particular,
the Catholic Church and the Republic of Letters.
Before turning to these two communities, it may be useful to say some¬
thing about four other groups which used Latin and may have been bonded
by Latin: lawyers, officials, diplomats and travellers.
Latin was employed by lawyers and notaries in many parts of Europe
in the early modern period and even later. In the case of lawyers, the
importance of Latin corresponded to the importance of Roman law in
many parts of Europe. As for notaries, at the end of the Middle Ages, the
University of Bologna, for instance, offered special courses in Latin for
their benefit.4 5 Kilometres of documents in the archives of major Italian
cities attest the importance of the language, especially for the formal parts
of documents.
Even the record of the interrogation of a suspect in the vernacular nor¬
mally included Latin formulae for what might be called the ‘stage direc¬
tions’. For example, the painter Paolo Veronese was summoned before the
Inquisition in Venice in 1573 on suspicion of heresy. The record of his inter¬
rogation begins: Constitutus in sancto offitio coram sacro tribunali (‘arraigned
before the Holy Tribunal of the Holy Office’), while each section opens
with the formula interrogatus respondit (‘on being questioned, he replied’).
If the suspect was shown a book or the instruments of torture, this would
also be recorded in Latin.
In the second place, Latin was a language of justice and administra¬
tion in early modern Europe, although it was becoming less important in
this respect than it had been in medieval times. For example, in the joint
4 Ludwig Bieler, ‘Das Mittellatein als Sprachproblem’, Lexis 1 (1949), pp. 98-104, at p. 104: cf. Christine
Mohrmann, ‘Le dualisme de la latinitt' m£di6vale’ (1952: repr. Mohrmann, Latin vulgaire, Latin des
chretiens, Latin medieval, Paris, 1955, pp. 37-54), and Banfi, Formazione, p. 9.
5 Helene Wieruszowski, ‘Ars dictaminis in the time of Dante’ (1943: repr. in her Politics and Culture in
Medieval Spain and Italy, Rome, 1971), pp. 359-77, at p. 362.

## 45
Latin: a language in search of a community
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth founded in 1569, many municipal and
court records were kept in Latin.
It was in the Habsburg Empire in particular that Latin remained impor¬
tant in the bureaucratic domain. In the seventeenth century, the officials
of the imperial chamber or Hofkammer in Vienna, concerned with the
financial affairs of the empire, corresponded in Latin with their opposite
numbers in Bratislava (otherwise known as Pressburg or Pozsony). The
proceedings or Acta of the imperial Diet or Reichstag were recorded in
Latin, while in the Hungarian Diet Latin was, at least in principle, the
language of debate, as well as that of the documents emanating from the
Diet, notably the complaints or petitions {gravamina). In that multilingual
empire, a dead language had the advantage of being politically neutral as
well as a lingua franca that allowed speakers of German, Hungarian, Czech,
Croat and other languages to communicate on equal terms, provided they
enjoyed the benefits of a classical education.6
In the third place, Latin was the principal language of diplomacy. Queen
Elizabeth’s denunciation of the Polish ambassador for his ‘insolent audacity’
{insolentem audaciam) is a vivid reminder of this traditional diplomatic prac¬
tice. The queen was fluent enough in the language to lose her temper in
Latin. Elizabeth may have been unusual among the rulers of the period
in this respect — the humanist Roger Ascham had been in charge of her
education - but some of her royal colleagues also knew the language tolera¬
bly well, including her father Henry VIII, her sister Mary, Mary’s husband
Philip of Spain, Isabella of Castille (who studied Latin when she was an
adult), Margaret of Austria and Stefan Bathory, King of Poland.
Latin is a conspicuous absence from the list of languages attributed to
the emperor Charles V, but an English ambassador testified that although
‘The Emperor hath no pleasure to speak Latin’, he was able to understand
it. Ministers were sometimes fluent in the language, Cardinal Wolsey for
instance, or Axel Oxenstierna, while ambassadors needed to be at least com¬
petent in Latin.7 This situation made relations between Western Europe
6 Jean Beranger, ‘Latin et langues vernaculaires dans la Hongrie du 17c sRcle’, Revue Historique 242
(1969), pp. 5-28; Beranger (ed.), Les 'Gravamina remonstrances des dietes de Hongrie de i6ys & 1681
(Paris, 1973); Robert J. W. Evans, The Making of the Habsburg Monarchy, isso-1700: an Interpretation
(Oxford, 1979), pp. 20-4, 259.
7 Garrett Mattingly, Renaissance Diplomacy (London, 1955), pp. 38~9; Joycelyne G. Russell, Diplomats
at Work: Three Renaissance Studies (Stroud, 1992), pp. 1, 8-10, 12, 19-20; Janet M. Green, ‘Queen
Elizabeth Is Latin reply to the Polish Ambassador’, Sixteenth-Century Journal 31 (2000), pp. 987-
1006; on Stefan Bathory, Norman Davies, God’s Playground: a History of Poland, vol. 1 (Oxford, 1981),
p. 478.

## 4 6
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
and Muscovy or the Ottoman Empire more difficult, since Latin was
not a normal part of elite culture in either state. Dmitri Gerasimov, the
Muscovite ambassador to pope Clement VII, was unusual in his command
of the language.
One of the advantages of Latin in the diplomatic domain was that it
was relatively well known by members of the elite, another that it was
prestigious, a third that it was neutral compared to the vernaculars that
were competing for cultural hegemony at this time, notably Italian, Spanish
and French. The Swedish chancellor, Oxenstierna, spoke Latin rather than
French to Cromwell’s envoy, Bulstrode Whitelocke (so he explained) partly
because Latin was ‘more honourable’, but also because at present that
language was not peculiar to any people’.8
Latin retained its importance in international relations for most of the
seventeenth century, at the peace congresses of Munster and Nijmegen,
for instance, and even beyond, despite the legend that French became the
language of diplomacy in the reign of Louis XIV (below, p. 86). Even in the
eighteenth century, Latin continued to be used as a written language, for
example to draw up international treaties. It was only slowly that French
became what it was to remain until the first half of the twentieth century,
the diplomatic language par excellence.9
Travellers too often had recourse to Latin as a lingua franca. At one end
of Europe, Elizabethan Englishmen sometimes used the language in their
dealings with the Irish, while a Spaniard who landed in Ireland after the
wreck of the Armada probably owed his life to his ability to communicate
with the inhabitants in Latin.10 Towards the other end of Europe, Poland
and Flungary were frequently described as places where some knowledge of
Latin was unusually widespread. Daniel Defoe expressed his surprise that
‘a man who can speak Latin may travel from one end of Poland to another
as familiarly as if he was born in the country. Bless us! What would a
gentleman do that was to travel through England and could speak nothing
but Latin’.11
As for Hungary, a Flemish Capuchin went so far as to claim in 1633
that ‘peasants and shepherds’ there ‘speak Latin more fluently than many
priests do elsewhere’. Phis remark may have been more of a critique
# Bulstrode Whitelocke, A Journal of the Swedish Embassy (2 vols., London, 1855), vol. 1, p. 300.
Cf. Nils Ahnlund, Svenskt och Nordiskt (Stockholm, 1943), p. 115.
9 Ferdinand Brunot, La ague fran(aise, vol. v, pp. 387-422, esp. pp. 392-5, 402, 407-8; Lucien Bely,
Espions et ambassadeurs (Paris, 1990), pp. 450-55.
10 Patricia Palmer, Language and Conquest in Early Modern Ireland (Cambridge, 2001), pp. 70, 83.
" Defoe quoted in Davies, God's Playground, pp. 236-7.

## 47
Latin: a language in search of a community
of the secular clergy than an encomium to shepherds, but the more
detailed testimony of the English traveller Edward Browne deserves to be
taken seriously. Browne noted in 1668 that in Hungary and Transylvania,
‘coachmen, watermen and mean persons’ could all make themselves under¬
stood in Latin. Soldiers, another nomadic group, also knew some Latin,
while a Hungarian scholar has noted that ‘the criminal law suits of the eigh¬
teenth century often bear evidence to the fact that ordinary people spoke
## Latin’.12
We should not, of course, imagine coachmen and ostlers declining and
conjugating the language without errors in a country in which noblemen
frequently made mistakes (below, p. 57). It is more likely that in this part of
the world spoken Latin had become a pidgin. As in the case of more recent
pidgins, inflections probably disappeared while verbs were reduced to their
infinitives, so that it would have been sufficient to enter a Hungarian tavern
and utter the phrase ‘vinum bibere’ in order to be served. ‘Travellers’ Latin’,
as we might call it, was Latin without the frills and indeed without most
of the resources of the language.
Even outside Europe a knowledge of Latin had its value, as the
eighteenth-century Englishman John Barrow found in Brazil, when he
found himself able to use it to communicate with a friar in Rio de Janeiro.13
This was one of the advantages of Latin being the official language of
the Catholic Church, taught in schools and seminaries not only in Brazil
(beginning with the school at Piratininga founded in the later sixteenth
century by the Jesuit Jose de Anchieta), but also in Mexico and Peru.
Latin schools were founded in Mexico City, Michoacan, and most
famous of all, in Tlatelolco, where the college of Santa Cruz opened in
- At this college, Indian boys learned Latin (in Nahuatl) and also some
Spanish. In 1584, some of the pupils were fluent enough to make speeches in
both Latin and Spanish. A story told by a missionary concerns the surprise
of a priest who had just arrived from Spain when an Indian student spoke
to him in Latin.
By the end of the century, the college of Tlatelolco had ceased to exist,
but Latin continued as the medium of instruction in the universities of
Mexico and Lima, both of them founded in the middle of the sixteenth
century. Indeed, at the inauguration of the University of Mexico in 1553, a
Latin oration was delivered by Francisco Cervantes de Salazar, the professor
12 Further examples in Burke, Heu domine , pp. 35—7’ Istvin G. T6th, Beyond Literacy: Latin as
a Spoken Language’, in his Literacy and Written Culture in Early Modern Europe (1996: English
translation, Budapest, 2000), pp. 130-45, at pp. 135, 137, 140.
13 Gilberto Freyre, The Masters and the Slaves (1933: English translation, New York, 1946), p. 375-

48 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
of rhetoric and later rector. The Commentaries of Cervantes, including three
dialogues about Mexico, were used as a Latin textbook.
In Japan, Latin was introduced by Jesuit missionaries alongside Chris¬
tianity. In the later sixteenth century, the Jesuit colleges founded at Azuchi
and Arima taught the boys Latin from locally-printed editions of classical
texts, including Cicero. However, Latin did not survive the outlawing of
Christianity and the closing’ of the country in 1639. In the Dutch colony
of Batavia, in what is now Indonesia, Latin went through a similar rise and
fall. Founded by the Governor-General in 1642 for both Dutch and mestizo
hoys, the Latin school was closed in 1670.14
## LATIN IN THE CHURCH
The function of Latin as the language of the Church is well known. Ail the
same, an exact description of its place in practice is not easy. Research is
still needed for the contours to be fully mapped, and what follows should
be regarded as no more than a rough approximation.
In the first place, Latin was generally the language of the Catholic
liturgy - the Mass, baptisms, weddings, funerals and the daily round of
prayer in the monasteries.15 This was the case for some sixteen hundred
years, from the 360s, more or less, to the 1960s (before the 360s, Greek had
been in use).16 The dominance of Latin in this domain was challenged in
the early sixteenth century but it was re-affirmed in a decree of the Council
of Trent on 5 September 1562 and survived until 7 March 1965.
In the case of certain minorities, liturgies in other languages were permit¬
ted. The so-called ‘Uniates’ in the Ukraine and the Balkans were allowed,
from 1596 onwards, to use what is now called Old Church Slavonic in their
liturgy, like their neighbours in the Eastern Church in Muscovy. Greek was
also used for liturgical purposes in the Balkans in the seventeenth and eigh¬
teenth centuries. Syriac, Arabic and Georgian were in use in parts of the
Catholic world in the seventeenth century, while Pope Paul V permitted
the use of mandarin for the Mass in China (apparently this decree was not
implemented).'7
14 Shirley Heath, Telling Tongues: Language Policy in Mexico, Colony to Nation (New York, 1972), pp. 28-
9, 228; Kees Groeneboer, Gateway to the West: the Dutch Language in Colonial Indonesia, 1600—tpyo:
a history of language policy (1993: English translation, Amsterdam, 1998), p. 45.
15 Giovanni Michele Hanssens, ‘Lingua liturgica’, in Enciclopedia Cattolica (Vatican City, 1951),
vol. vii, columns 1377-82.
16 Gustave hardy, La question des langues cLtns TEglise ancienne (Paris, 1948).
17 Alphonsus Raes, Introductio in liturgiam orientalem (Rome, 1947), pp. 220-5; Hanssens, ‘Lingua’.

## 49
Latin: a language in search of a community
The use of Latin for the liturgy over so wide an area with such diverse
vernaculars helped create a sense oi distance from everyday life and a sense
oi universality. It also encouraged a sense of tradition, which might be
defined as membership oi a community that includes the dead as well as
the living.
The Protestant Reformation obviously led to a drastic reduction in the
territory of Latin. The positive side of the change will be discussed in the
next chapter, but the negative side, the loss of the sense of universality
and continuity, deserves to be remembered here. This loss is exactly what
some oi the reformers wanted. Using the everyday vernacular was a way of
desacralizing religious services, of reducing the gap between the religious
domain and ordinary life. Other reformers, like Thomas Cranmer, arch¬
bishop of Canterbury, favoured the vernacular for practical reasons, but
adopted a form of vernacular that would as far as possible rival Latin in its
dignity thanks to the use of archaic forms.
Latin was also the language of the clergy, at least when carrying out their
official duties, the lingua sacerdotum, as John of Salisbury had called it in
the twelfth century. It was the language of the respublica clericorum, the
commonwealth of clerks’, as a twentieth-century linguist has described
it.lS One might call it, somewhat less kindly, the jargon of the clergy, and
as we have seen (above, p. 32), it was indeed sometimes described in late
medieval France as clerquois.
From the clergy’s point of view, in the Middle Ages at least, there were
two cultures, that of the clergy, the literati who knew Latin, and that of the
laity, vulgus or illiterati, who did not (the adjective illiteratus usually meant
‘ignorant of Latin’ rather than ‘illiterate’ in the modern sense). In that sense,
Latin, like other languages and dialects, created a community by including
some people and excluding others. In practice, this ‘folk model’ was never
completely accurate and it was working less and less well as time went
by. A growing group of laity were learning Latin, including a few women,
among them learned ladies of the Renaissance, such as Isotta Nogarola and
Laura Cereta in Italy, Caritas Pirckheimer in Germany, Beatriz Galindo,
nicknamed ‘La Latina’, in Spain, and Mildred Cooke in England.19 In the
Venetian convent of Santa Maria delle Vergini, it was customary for the
election of an abbess to be marked by a Latin oration by one of the nuns.20
18 Mohrmann, ‘dualisme’, p. 43; Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (1983: revised ed., London,
## I991)-
19 Jane Stevenson, ‘Women and Latin in Renaissance Europe’, Bulletin of the Society for Renaissance
Studies 19, no. 2 (2002), pp. 10-16.
zo Mary Laven, Virgins of Venice (2002: second ed., London, 2003), p. 76.

## 50
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
On the other side, the visitations conducted by some Italian bishops in
the fifteenth century give a strong impression that a substantial proportion
of the parish clergy did not know the language. This point was drawn to
the attention of the pope in 1513 by some would-be reformers, but nothing
was done to remedy the situation.11 In Palermo, for instance, the problem
was apparently much the same in the middle of the sixteenth century.22 It
is likely that the Italian clergy were not alone in their ignorance. Awareness
of this problem was one reason for the foundation of seminaries from the
later sixteenth century onwards, institutions in which future parish priests
were able to learn the Latin they needed.
In the case of meetings of the clergy- church councils, synods of dioceses,
and so on - it is often difficult to discover what language was spoken.
Sermons raise a similar problem. It may seem counter-intuitive to suggest
that sermons could have been preached in Latin to audiences including
ordinary people, but speakers of romance languages at least might well
have understood simple Latin, especially if it alternated with passages in
the vernacular. ‘Macaronic’ sermons of this kind were not uncommon in
Italy and France at the end of the Middle Ages (below, p. 133).
Well or ill understood, Latin left traces on the culture, including the
vernacular of ordinary people, as was shown both fully and vividly in a
recent study of ‘the Latin of those who do not know it' by the linguist
Gian Luigi Beccaria. Beccaria points out that in Italy, ‘the dialects are full
of liturgical Latin’ even today, while some of the examples he quotes go
back to early modern times. In the Venetian of Chioggia, for instance,
an authoritarian person is nicknamed potente de sede, and someone full
of himself un egosum, phrases derived respectively from the Magnificat,
Deposuit potentes de sede, and from St John's Gospel 11.25, Egosum resuirectio
et vita.
Some of the Italian examples are simple borrowings, like introibo for
‘preamble’ or confiteor for ‘apology’. Others seem to be cases of mishearing
or misunderstanding, like visibilio in the sense of ‘contusion’, derived from
the phrase in the Credo, visibilium omnium et invisibilium. Examples of
popular Latin of this kind are not confined to Italy. In a sixteenth-century
Portuguese play, a black woman is represented as saying sato biceto nomen
tuu! (sanctificetur nomen tuum).23 Yet other examples express playfulness,
irony and mockery, including the mockery of liturgical Latin itself,
21 Denys Hay, The Church in Italy in the Fifteenth Century (Cambridge, 1977), pp. 49-57.
11 Mari D Agostino, I.a Piazza e I'altart: momenti dellapolitico linguisticsdella chiesasiciliana (Palermo,
1988), pp. 27, 43.
21 Antbnio Ribeiro Chiado, Auto das regateiras, ed. Giulia Lanciani (Rome, 1970), p. 56.

## 5i
Latin: a language in search of a community
uncrowning’ it as Bakhtin would say, stripping it of its dignity. A woman
regarded as too pious, for instance, was known in the sixteenth century as
una magnificatte, while shouting was described as ‘singing Vespers’, cantare
il vespro ,24
This semi-comprehension of Latin does not mean that no one felt
excluded, that no one was excluded or that no one rebelled against the dom¬
inance of Latin in the Church. It was often said that Latin was employed by
the clergy precisely in order to keep the laity at a distance, to keep them in
ignorance. In fifteenth-century Bohemia, the reformer Jan Hus challenged
the use ol Latin in the Church, as other heretics, such as the Waldensians,
had done before him. In similar fashion, in 1524, the radical Protestant
Thomas Mtinzer declared it intolerable ‘that people ascribe a power to Latin
words, as the magicians do (das man den Lateinischen worten wil eine kraft
zuschreiben, wie die zaubrer thun). Menocchio the miller and Gelli the shoe¬
maker (quoted above, p. 17) were not alone in their complaints.25 Heretics
demanded the right to read the Bible in the vernacular and, conversely,
those who wanted to read the Bible for themselves were labelled heretics.
The supporters of Latin in church were not all Catholics, and the oppo¬
nents of that language were not all Protestants. On one side, Martin Luther,
for instance, took up a moderate position, advocating the retention of a
Latin liturgy for its educational value, and the creation of a vernacular
liturgy for those who lacked Latin.26 On the other side, the Venetian her¬
mits Paolo Giustiniani and Vincenzo Quirini wrote a letter to the pope
in 1513 recommending a vernacular liturgy, while three years later Erasmus
made his famous appeal — in Latin, since he was addressing the learned — for
the translation of the Bible into the vernacular so that ploughmen, weavers,
and ‘the lowliest women’ would be able to read it. As late as the 1560s, at the
last sessions of the Council of Trent, some cardinals and bishops continued
to argue — in Latin, since that was the language of the Council — in favour
of a Bible and a liturgy in the vernacular.27
Generally speaking, however, Catholics accepted the arguments of people
like the Roman humanist Angelo Colocci, who defended the use of Latin
in the liturgy and the law alike ‘because they lose their force without brevity
24 Gian Luigi Beccaria, Sicuterat: il Latino di chi non lo sa (1999: second ed., Milan, 2001), pp. 14-17,
## 77, 89, 99, 100, 105, IIO.
25 Quoted in Strassner, Sprachkultur, p. 55.
26 Herman Schmidt, Liturgie et langue vulgaire: le probleme de la langue liturgique chez les premiers
Reformateurs et au Concile de Trente (Rome, 1950), p. 50.
27 Leopold Lentner, Volksprache und Sakralsprache: Geschichte einer Lebensfrage bis zum Ende des Konzil
von Trient (Vienna, 1964), ch. 5; Vittorio Coletti, ‘Il volgare al Concilio di Trento’ (repr. Parole del
pulpito: chiesa e movimenti religiosi tra Latino e volgare, Casale, 1983), pp. 189—211.

52 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
and majesty’. The idea that Latin was a more dignified language and there¬
fore more appropriate in the religious domain was widespread at the time.
At the Council of Trent, some of the participants argued that Latin kept the
sacraments sacred, and others that it was necessary to follow the ‘ancient rite’
(ritus antiquus).28 The arguments of the reformers in favour of a vernacular
liturgy were rejected. Fears were also expressed that divergent translations
from Latin into different languages would lead to a fragmentation of the
Church into what we might describe as different ‘communities of interpre¬
tation’. In any case, the vernacular was associated with Protestantism by this
time. It was finally agreed by participants in the Council that the liturgy
should remain in Latin, with explanations in the vernacular provided in
sermons for those who needed them.29
There were, of course, other religious languages current in early modern
Europe. The Jews used Hebrew, the Muslims in Spain and the Ottoman
Empire used Arabic, while in Eastern Christendom, the language of the
Church was not Latin but Slavonic. Church Slavonic was close enough to
the local vernaculars to be generally intelligible but distant enough to sound
distinct and dignified. It was understood, as a monk from Kiev, Zakhariya
Kopystens’ky, remarked with pride in 1623, from the Adriatic to the Arctic,
and so, like Latin, encouraged the sense of belonging to a trans-national or
supranational religious community.
In Europe, then, we see a contraction of the empire of ecclesiastical Latin,
the result of the Reformation. In the New World, to redress the balance, the
empire of Latin expanded, as Catholic missionaries taught that language to
some of the Amerindians. Latin also expanded eastwards, as the following
section will show.
## LATIN IN THE REPUBLIC OF LETTERS
In Eastern Christendom, Church Slavonic was the language of the learned
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, as well as the language of the
liturgy. As the German scholar Heinrich Ludolf observed in his Russian
grammar (1696), ‘Russian is for speaking and Slavonic is for writing'
(.loquendum est Russice et scribendum est Slavonice). We might therefore
describe Church Slavonic as the functional equivalent of Latin, especially
in the Romance-speaking parts of Europe. Although this language was
not used for official documents, the ‘chancery language’ (prikazni jazik) of
Muscovy took the form of a Russian influenced by Church Slavonic, just
as official English or French was influenced by Latin.
D’Agostino, La Piazza,, p. 29.
29 Schmidt, Liturgie, pp. no—n, 174-5.

## 53
Latin: a language in search of a community
In the West, in Protestant and Catholic countries alike, Latin was the
language of ‘the learned communitie’ as the English schoolmaster Richard
Mulcaster called it, or to quote a Swedish scholar, ‘the mother tongue of the
learned’ (lingua eruditorum vernacula) .3° The fact that scholars from Lisbon
to Cracow could correspond in Latin gave them a sense of belonging to an
international community that they described as the ‘Republic of Letters’, or
‘Commonwealth of Learning’ (Respublica Litterarum). On the other hand,
the use of Latin virtually excluded Orthodox Europe from this Republic,
at least in the sixteenth century, since a fluent Latinist like the diplomat
Dmitri Gerasimov, who frequented learned circles in Renaissance Rome,
or Prince Kurbsky, who owned a number of Latin books, were rare birds
in Russia.
The foundation of new universities in the early modern period enlarged
the network of centres of Latin. In the sixteenth century, new univer¬
sities included Dillingen, Dublin, Franeker, Geneva, Helmstedt, Jena,
Konigsberg, Leiden, Olomouc and Wilno (Vilnius). In the seventeenth
century, Abo, Altdorf, Cagliari, Giessen, Innsbruck, Kassa, Lund, Lwow
(L’viv), Nijmegen and Utrecht. In the eighteenth century, Bonn, Breslau
## (now Wroclaw), Dijon, Erlangen, Gottingen, Moscow, Pau, Rennes,
St Petersburg and Stuttgart.
As the examples of Koenigsberg, Wilno, Lwow (like Wilno, originally
a Jesuit college), Moscow and St Petersburg show, the practice of writing
and speaking Latin gradually spread eastwards. In Lithuania, for instance,
Augustin Rotundus, burgomaster of Wilno, composed a Latin chronicle
in 1576 and translated the laws of Lithuania into Latin. He claimed that
the Lithuanians were attracted to Latin as an alternative to Polish at a time
when they were ruled by the Poles. Latin schools, including the Slavo-
Greco-Latin Academy, were opened in Moscow, and the inventory of the
library of the Zaikonopassky monastery there reveals the presence of 414
Latin books in 1689.31
In the eighteenth century, the proceedings of the Academy of Sciences
of St Petersburg were published in Latin, rather than the German proposed
by some expatriate scholars. Latin was taught in the Academy’s school at
this time.32 In the Balkans too there was a rise of interest in Latin culture.
The Bulgarian monk Christophor Zefarovic knew Latin well enough to
translate poetry.
30 Richard Mulcaster, The First Part of the Elementarie (1582: facsimile repr., Menston, 1970), p. 257;
Lindberg, lardes modersmdl.
31 Antoine Martel, La languepolonaise dans lespays ruthenes, Ukraine et Russie Blanche, i$6<)-i66j (Lille,
1938), pp. 52-3, 70, 279, 305.
32 Riccardo Picchio and Harvey Goldblatt (eds.), Aspects, vol. i, p. 18.

## 54
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In Western and Central Europe (including Bohemia, Poland and
Hungary) Latin had long been taught in schools, especially ‘grammar
schools’, and it was often the means as well as the object of instruction. Latin
grammars were written in Latin. The boys were supposed to speak Latin
in class and even in the playground, and a spy, known as a ‘wolF [lupus)
was supposed to inform the teacher if anyone lapsed into the vernacular.
The point of this insistence was that spoken as well as written Latin was of
practical importance in that society, given the need to make speeches and
deliver sermons. Spoken Latin was taught by reading plays aloud (notably
the plays of the Roman playwright Terence), as well as by modern dialogues
written for the purpose, by Erasmus, for instance, and also by the French
Protestant schoolmaster Mathurin Cordier, whose Colloquia appeared in
1563 and went through numerous editions.
Latin remained virtually the only language of instruction in the univer¬
sities, officially at least, thus allowing them to function as a pan-European
system in which students could move from country to country with relative
ease, a custom known as peregrinatio academica. The right of Masters of Arts
‘to teach everywhere’, the ius ubique docendi, reinforced the opportunities
provided by Latin. It is only recently, with the rise of English as an academic
lingua franca, that the mobility of European students and teachers has been
able to return to something like early modern levels.33 The statutes of the
colleges of Oxford and Cambridge not infrequently required the students
to speak Latin at meals or more generally in public places, such as the
college hall or chapel.34
Treatises in Latin helped to create what have been described as ‘textual
communities’.35 The sheer number of books published in Latin in early
modern Europe (including Britain) deserves to be remembered. At the
annual Frankfurt fairs, for instance, the majority of books for sale were
books in Latin until quite late in the seventeenth century (67 per cent in
1650, declining to 38 per cent in 1700).36 Educated men who spoke different
vernaculars often corresponded in Latin, as John Wesley and the German
Pietist Peter Bohler did as late as the eighteenth century. In this respect, the
33 Hilde de Ridder-Symoens (ed.), A History of the University in Europe, vol. 1 (Cambridge, 1992),
pp. 280-304; vol. 11 (1996), pp. 416-48.
34 For Hra.se nose, Jesus and Worcester College, Oxford, Robert J. W. Evans, The Language of History
and the History of Language (Oxford, 1998), p. 20.
35 Brian Stock, The Implications of Literacy: Written Language and Models of Interpretation in the Eleventh
and Twelfth Centuries (Princeton, 1983).
36 James W. Binns, Intellectual Culture in Elizabethan and Jacobean England (Oxford, 1990); Timothy
Blanning, The Culture of Power and the Power of Culture: Old Regime Europe 1660-IJ&9 (Oxford,
2002), p. 145.

Latin: a language in search of a community 55
continuity between the Middle Ages and early modern times was important
indeed.
What was new in this period was the challenge to Latin, the debate
over its place in the world of scholarship. Several humanists wrote against
the employment of the vernacular in the domain of learning, as Romolo
Amaseo did in his oration at Bologna ‘On retaining the use of Latin’, De
linguae latinae usu retinendo (1529). Similar points to Amaseo’s were made
by the character ‘Ercole Strozzi’ and the character of ‘Lazzaro Bonamico’
in the famous dialogues on language written by Pietro Bembo and Sperone
## Speroni.37
Writers now had to choose which language to employ. Erasmus and
Luther represent two strategies and indeed two conceptions of community,
which might be described as the horizontal and the vertical.38 Erasmus
chose geographical breadth. A native speaker of a small language, he chose
Latin in order to broadcast his message to the Republic of Letters, in
other words to learned readers in most countries of Europe, from Portugal
to Poland and from England to Hungary. Luther, who also wrote in Latin
for the learned public, devoted more effort to the vernacular in order to
achieve social depth, to reach out to ordinary people, or, as he used to say,
‘the common man’ {der gemeine Mann) in the German-speaking world.
As scholars increasingly followed Luther’s example and wrote in their
own vernaculars, translations became necessary. They included translations
from the vernacular into Latin, a demonstration, if one were needed, of
the continuing importance of Latin in European intellectual life. Well over
a thousand such translations were made between 1500 and 1800, reaching
their height in the first half of the seventeenth century (at least 367 such texts
were published between 1600 and 1649, 3n other words more than seven
a year). About forty per cent of the texts translated were religious, while
about twelve per cent might be described as works of what was known in
the period as ‘natural philosophy’, ranging from mathematics to medicine
and magic.39
For example, Galileo Galilei began his scholarly career with a book pub¬
lished in Latin, the ‘Starry Messenger’ (Sidereus nuncius). He switched
to Italian later in order to widen his domestic audience. His change of
strategy - from Erasmian to Lutheran, one might say - provoked a protest
37 Pietro Bembo, Prose della vulgar lingua (1525: in Prose e rime, ed. Carlo Dionisotti, Turin, i960,
pp. 71—309); Sperone Speroni, Dialogo della lingua (1542: ed. Helene Harth, Munich, 1975).
38 Lindberg, lardes modersmdlp. 149.
39 Ann Blair, ‘La persistance du Latin comme langue de science 4 la fin de la Renaissance’, in Roger
Chartier and Pietro Corsi (eds.), Sciences et langues en Europe (Paris, 1996), pp. 21-42.

## 56
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
from one of his German admirers, Mark Welser, who could no longer
understand the words of the master. Although a number of foreigners
understood Italian at this time, as we shall see (below, pp. 113ff.), it was
necessary for Galileo to be translated into Latin, by the German professor
Matthias Bernegger and the Swiss lawyer Elio Diodati, so that his ideas
could continue to circulate widely beyond Italy.
In similar fashion, Rend Descartes, who published his Meditations in
Latin, switched to French for his Discourse on Method, for his study of
the passions and for other works directed towards a socially diverse pub¬
lic. Thanks to translators such as the Protestant clergymen Etienne de
Courcelles and Henri Desmarets, these works too continued to circulate
in the language of the learned. At the end of the seventeenth century,
Newton took a similar decision, shifting from his Latin Principia to his
English Optics, which was then translated into Latin by his disciple Samuel
## Clarke.40
For the Erasmian solution to work, Latin needed to be learned early. It
generally was learned early, even if Montaigne, who claimed in his Essays
(book 1, chapter 25) that it was actually his first language, is an admittedly
extreme case: ‘I was over six before I could understand more French or
the dialect of Perigord than I did Arabic’ (J’avois plus de six ans avant que
j’entendisse non plus de frangois ou de perigordin que d’arabesque). Erasmus
himself, who spent much of his life outside his native Netherlands, is
virtually never recorded speaking Dutch, except on his deathbed (his last
words were lieve Godt, ‘dear God’).
There remains the question, what kind of Latin did people know and
use in this period? We need to speak and to think of‘Latins’ in the plural,
just as linguists have recently been speaking and writing about different
‘Englishes’.4' One might begin with the problem of divergent pronuncia¬
tions. The English, for instance, pronounced their Latin so differently from
other people that foreigners had difficulty understanding what they were
saying.
Written Latin also came in numerous varieties. The main distinction was
the one between the neoclassical Latin of the humanists and the medieval
Latin of the Church. However, Church Latin was far from monolithic. It
ranged from the simplicity of the liturgy or the Vulgate to the complexity
of the prose of St Bernard. In any case, some of the sixteenth-century clergy
wrote like humanists.
40 Peter Burke, ‘ Translations into Latin in Early Modern Europe’, in Peter Burke and Ronnie Hsia
(eds.), The (,ultural History of Translation in Early Modern Europe (forthcoming).
41 Tom McArthur, The English Languages (Cambridge, 1998).

## 57
Latin: a language in search of a community
By contrast, the Latin of notaries was generally mixed with vernacular
terms, and it was described at the time as ‘Coarse Latin, the friend of
the laity’ (Latinum grossum pro laicis amicum).42 Scholastic Latin in the
universities, which would be known later as ‘the jargon of the schools’, was
different again, influenced as it was by philosophers’ Greek.43 The Latin
of the majority of learned publications in early modern Europe was not
so much classical as a hybrid of ancient and medieval Latin, together with
some neologisms.44 To these varieties should be added the many individual
mistakes committed by people who had not learned Latin properly, like
the Hungarian nobleman who wrote malum propria, more or less ‘with his
own apple’, when he meant to write manupropria, ‘with his own hand’.45
These varieties were either confused or deliberately conflated by the
humanists in their general condemnation of what they described as ‘kitchen
Latin’ or ‘dog Latin’ and viewed as part of the barbarism of what they called
the ‘Dark Ages’.46 The humanists focused on a negative characteristic of
these different Latins, the fact of not being classical. All they noticed in
medieval Latin was what white teachers used to notice in Black English, a
kind of defecit. They were the first linguistic purists - or, more exactly, the
first since Hellenistic times (below, p. 156).
For their part, the humanists tried to follow ancient models in writing
and even in speaking Latin. The term ‘models’ needs to be used in the
plural, since there was room for differences and debates. Many human¬
ists followed the example of Cicero, imitating his complex sentences and
even his mannerisms, such as ending a sentence with the stock phrase
esse videatur. In the later sixteenth century, however, there was a move¬
ment, associated with the Netherlander Justus Lipsius in particular, to
follow a later classical model, based on two writers of the so-called ‘silver
age’, the philosopher Seneca and the historian Tacitus. The new model,
described as ‘Attic’ rather than ‘Asiatic’ (terms originally applied to varieties
of ancient Greek), was defined in terms of simplicity - less ornament, fewer
words - and also a looser structure, with relatively frequent parentheses.47
42 Philippe Wolff, Western Languages ad 100-1500 (London, 1971), p. 201.
43 Peter Burke, ‘The Jargon of the Schools’, in Burke and Roy Porter (eds.), Languages and Jargons
(Cambridge, 1995), pp. 22-41.
44 Waquet, Latin, pp. 124-9.
45 Toth, ‘Beyond Literacy’, p. 132; on a more recent period, Waquet, Latin, pp. 119-71.
46 Paul Lehmann, ‘Mittelalter und Kuchenlatein’ (1928: repr. in his Erforschung des Mittelalters, 5 vols.,
Leipzig, 1941), pp. 46-62, at p. 57; Rudolf Pfeiffer, ‘Kuchenlatein’ (1931: repr. in his Ausgewdhlte
Scbriften, Munich, i960), pp. 183—7.
47 Morris W. Croll, ‘Juste Lipse et le mouvement anticicdronien’ (1914: repr. in his Style, Rhetoric and
Rhythm, Princeton, 1966), pp. 7-44; Croll, ‘Attic Prose in the Seventeenth Century’, repr. ibid.,
pp. 51-106.

58 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
The great paradox of humanist Latin was that the so-called ‘revival’
of the classical language meant replacing a living language with a ‘dead
one. Or, to use a more appropriate metaphor, it meant replacing a fluid
language with one that was fixed. Erasmus saw the problem more clearly
than most of his colleagues. In his dialogue the Ciceronianus (1528), he
raised the awkward question, how a modern follower of Cicero would refer
to institutions and objects that had not existed in Cicero’s day.48 After all,
writers and speakers alike might want to refer to Muslims, or to canon, or
the pope. The alternatives were to coin neologisms, such as mahometani or
bombardae, or to adopt classical terms that had originally had a different
meaning, such as pontifex maximus.49 One solution sounded inelegant,
but the other was potentially misleading, translating vague similarities into
identity.
However, more was at stake in this debate than utility or lucidity. Latin
was not only a means of communication but also a symbol, indeed a shibbo¬
leth.50 Like italic handwriting, ciceronian Latin was a sign of participation
in the humanist movement. Fluent Latin was a badge of membership in the
community known as the Respublica Litterarum, the ‘Republic of Letters’
or ‘Commonwealth of Learning’ (litterae, literally ‘letters’ meant learning as
well as literature). This Latin phrase appeared in the early fifteenth century,
became more common at the time of Erasmus, and remained in use until
the eighteenth century.51 In this republic, the citizens in the full sense of
the term were the scholars, while the second-class citizens were the boys
who had attended grammar schools.
The history of Latin might be summed up in the language of the Swiss
historian Jacob Burckhardt, who distinguished ‘three powers', the State,
the Church, and Culture.52 Latin was first the language of the state, more
precisely of the Roman Empire. Then it became the language of the Church,
in this sense replacing the Roman Empire, as the political theorist Thomas
Hobbes maliciously noted in his Leviathan (1651), ‘the ghost of the Roman
Empire sitting crowned upon the grave thereoL. Finally, Latin became the
language of culture, at least of high culture.
However, from the middle of the seventeenth century onwards Latin
began to lose this position. A slow decline is discernible after 1650, and a
more rapid one after 1750 (of the 180 vernacular texts that were published in
48 Erasmus, Ciceronianus (1528: English translation, Collected Works 28, Toronto, 1986), pp. 323-68.
49 Burke, ‘Translations’.
50 Waquct, Latin, pp. 173—229: Ian Buruma, 'The Road to Babel’, New York Review of Books (31 May
2001), pp. 23-6.
51 Marc Fumaroli, I. 'iige de I'eloquence (Geneva, 1980): Waquet, iMtin.
51 Jacob Burckhardt, Reflections on History (1906: English translation, London, 1943).

## 59
Latin: a language in search of a community
Latin translation in the eighteenth century, only fifty appeared between 1750
and 1799). The geography as well as the chronology of decline is significant.
Speakers of small vernaculars often clung on to Latin as a defence against
encroachments from larger vernaculars. In Denmark and Hungary, for
instance, Latin was a means of defence against German, in Finland against
## Swedish.53
Elsewhere, Latin was becoming increasingly associated with pedantry,
an association linked to cultural changes, such as an increasing interest in
literature on the part of the nobility in France and elsewhere. A study of the
French book trade in the seventeenth century shows a dramatic shift from
learned folios in Latin in the first half of the century to works in octavo
format in the vernacular after 1650.54 A vestige of Latin survived to the end
of our period and beyond in the custom of referring to topics considered
obscene in Latin, even in a book written in the vernacular, such as Pierre
Bayle’s famous historical dictionary, in order to limit the readership of such
passages to educated men.
The seventeenth century was a time of many attempts to create universal
languages that would allow people from all parts of the world to commu¬
nicate without misunderstanding. Among the published projects were the
merchant Francis Lodwick’s Groundwork (1652), the schoolmaster George
Dalgarno’s Ars Signorum (1661), and, the most famous, the Essay towards
a Real Character and a Philosophical Language (1668) by John Wilkins,
a bishop who was also a natural philosopher and a Fellow of the Royal
## Society.
These projects, which interested philosophers of the calibre of Bacon,
Descartes and Leibniz, were in part attempts to eliminate ambiguities
of terminology, so as to describe more accurately the new discoveries in
natural philosophy. The ideal was to construct a philosophical’ or, as we
would say, a ‘scientific’ language. One of the models for this language
was the Chinese system of writing in ideograms or ‘characters’. Bacon, for
instance, was aware that the Chinese and the Japanese could communicate
by means of these characters, despite the mutual unintelligibility of their
languages, and he, like his follower Wilkins, regarded the characters as ‘real’
rather than nominal, expressing ideas without the mediation of a spoken
language. Another stimulus to the development of a universal language
was the expansion of the mission field, making the missionaries more and
53 liro Kajanto, ‘The Position of Latin in Eighteenth-Century Finland’, in Pierre Tuynman et al. (eds.),
Acta Conventus Neo-Latini Amstelodamensis (Munich, 1979), pp. 93-106.
54 Henri-Jean Martin, Print, Power and People in 17th-Century France (1969: English translation, Lon¬
don, 1993), pp. 528-9, 544-6, 566-7.

6 o
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
more conscious of the number, variety and complexity of non-European
languages.
However, these schemes for universal languages were also reactions to
the decline of Latin as a medium for international communication. As
Umberto Eco has suggested, it may be no accident that Lodwick, Dalgarno
and Wilkins were all British. As Protestants, they may have been hostile
to Latin because of its associations with the Catholic Church (above,
p. 48). They were also speakers of a language that few people in Europe
could understand (below, p. 115). Hence, the new philosophical languages
were intended as substitutes for Latin. In similar fashion, later Utopians
would pin their hopes on Esperanto.55
An alternative response to the decline of Latin was for educated Euro¬
peans to adopt a single vernacular as an international language. The shift
towards French in the late seventeenth century was part of the so-called
‘rise of the vernaculars’, to be discussed in the following chapter.
55 Vivian Salmon, The Works of Francis Lodwick (London, 1972), esp. pp. 43—51; James Knowlson,
Universal Language Schemes in England and France, 1600—1800 (Toronto, 1975); Mar)' M. Slaughter,
Universal Languages and Scientific Taxonomy in the Seventeenth Century (Cambridge, 1982); Umberto
Eco, The Search for the Perfect Language (1993: English translation, Oxford, 1995), especially
pp. 209—316.

## CHAPTER 3
Vernaculars in competition
It has often been argued that the early modern period was one of the ‘emer¬
gence’, the ‘rise’ or the ‘triumph’ of the national vernaculars, at the expense
of cosmopolitan Latin on the one hand and local dialects on the other.1
To the extent that this happened, the phenomenon was important for the
creation of new ‘speech communities’ and eventually new trans-regional or
super-regional loyalties. By 1750, the European linguistic system was very
different from the medieval system, which had been divided between a liv¬
ing but non-classical Latin and regional dialects which were spoken rather
than written.
However, the simple statement that the vernaculars of Europe ‘rose’
is a rather crude one. The short comparative survey which follows will
attempt to offer some at least of the necessary distinctions, nuances and
qualifications, as well as reflecting on the place in the history of differ¬
ent European vernaculars of the Renaissance, the Reformation, Abso¬
lutism (or at least the centralizing state), European expansion and the
## Enlightenment.
## THE WHIG INTERPRETATION AND ITS PROBLEMS
The story of the rise of the vernaculars is one that has often been told in
a triumphalist manner, notably in the cases of French and English, with a
stress on their victory over Latin or their ‘emancipation’ in the course of the
Renaissance and Reformation. We might call this version a ‘Whig’ history
of language and compare it to the traditional but much-criticized story of
the rise of the middle class.2
1 Richard F. Jones, The Triumph of the English Language (Stanford, 1953); Aldo Scaglione (ed.), The
Emergence of National Languages (Ravenna, 1984); Fredi Chiappelli (ed.), The Fairest Flower: the
Emergence of Linguistic National Consciousness in Renaissance Europe (Florence, 1985).
z Jack Hexter, ‘The Myth of the Middle Class in Tudor England’ (1950: repr. in Reappraisab in History,
London, 1961), pp. 71-116.
## 6l

## 62
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
The British medievalist George Coulton and the Russian theorist
Mikhail Bakhtin expressed the fundamental idea with characteristic vivid¬
ness when they wrote of a ‘revolt’ of the vernaculars against Latin and their
subsequent ‘victory’.3 Ferdinand Brunot had written still earlier about what
he called ‘the emancipation’, ‘campaign’, and ‘the victory’ of French in the
sixteenth century and of its ‘new conquests’ in science, philosophy and
elsewhere in the seventeenth.4 Again, Richard Jones’s famous study of early
modern English bears the title The Triumph of the English Language.5 6 A
history of early Italian prose emphasizes ‘The gradual rise and expansion
ol the Italian literary language at the expense of its Latin rival’/1 A study
of medieval Catalan speaks of its ‘constant race with Aragonese for victory
over Latin’ and its need ‘to attack the sovereignty of Latin in one field after
another’.7
There is, of course, something to be said for this traditional view. For
example, Italian, French, Spanish, English, German and Czech came to be
used more frequently in the domains of law and administration from the
fourteenth century onwards.
The same languages, together with others such as Flemish and Por¬
tuguese, were becoming increasingly important in the domain ofliterature,
boosted by the appearance of printed books in one vernacular after another
following 1460. The expansion of the vernaculars into these domains was
linked to the rise of lay literacy and so to the decline of the clerical quasi¬
monopoly of knowledge. It was also linked to attempts to reform or codify
the vernaculars to make them more suitable for their new functions.
In short, the ‘Whig’ argument is not exactly false. All the same, it is in
need of considerable refinement. The criteria for ‘victor)r’ or ‘emancipation’
need to be spelled out in order to respond to some serious problems, five
in particular:
- In the first place, the persistence of Latin, emphasized in the previous
chapter, together with its spread eastwards, is a reminder not to exaggerate
the victory of any vernacular. In his history of French, Ferdinand Brunot
was somewhat hasty in his dismissal of what he called the ‘obstacles’ to
3 George G. Coulton, Europe's Apprenticeship: a Survey ofMedieval Litin with Examples (London, 1940),
p. 84; Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and bis World (1965: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1968),
pp. 465, 473.
4 Ferdinand Brunot, Langue franfaise, vol. 11, pp. 2, 4, 31, and vol. in, pp. 713-5.
s Jones, Triumph.
6 Paul Kristeller, ‘The Origin and Development of the Language of Italian Prose’, in his Renaissance
Thought, vol. 11 (New York, 1965), pp. 119-41, at p. 120.
Helene Wieruszowski,' 1 he Rise of the Catalan Language in the Thirteenth Century’ (1944: repr. in
her Politics and Culture in Medieval Spain and Italy, Rome, 1971), pp. 107-18, at pp. 107, in.

Vernaculars in competition 63
the rise of French (including the use of Latin) as ‘resistances sans interet’.8
Today, by contrast, there is considerable interest in the history of post-
medieval Latin. The study of ‘Neo-Latin’, as it is often called, is sup¬
ported by associations of scholars that organize international conferences
and publish regular bulletins. Thanks to these scholars, the continuing
importance of Latin culture in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
has become abundantly clear.
- In the second place, there is the problem of assuming harmony or con¬
sensus, ignoring the variety of and the conflicts between early modern
‘Englishes’, for instance, or different forms of German or Italian.9 There
was often what might be called a ‘struggle for the standard’, to be dis¬
cussed in more detail in chapter 4.
- In the third place, to speak of the rise or ‘emergence’ of the vernaculars
in the sixteenth century runs the risk of forgetting the importance of
the earlier rise of some European vernaculars, in other words their use
in the domain of writing, including what we now call ‘literature’. This
was the case for French, Saxon and Irish in the ninth century or there¬
abouts, for Spanish and Slovene in the tenth century, Italian around the
year 1000, Provencal around 1100, Dutch and Icelandic in the twelfth
century, Hungarian and Danish in the thirteenth, Catalan and Polish
in the fourteenth.10 As for administration, the French royal chancery
switched to the vernacular soon after 1200. It was also in the thirteenth
century that King Alfonso X, known as El Sabio (‘the Wise’, or ‘the
Learned’) made Spanish the language of government.
- In the fourth place, there is the danger of projecting back into the
early modern period the close associations between language and nation
that only became common at the end of the eighteenth century.
Linguistic pluralism was commonplace in early modern Europe, as it
had been in the Middle Ages, and this at official as well as unofficial
levels.11
In the empire of Charles V, for instance, official letters were regularly
written in Latin, French and Italian, as well as in Spanish and German.
In some parts of Europe, such as Switzerland in the sixteenth century, a
single family might write letters in five languages (in Romansh as well
8 Brunot, Langue fran(aise, vol. 11, pp. 6-7, 31.
9 Paula Blank, Broken English: Dialects and the Politics of Language in Renaissance Writings (London,
## 1996).
10 Banfi, Formazione, p. u.
11 Janos Bak, ‘Linguistic Pluralism in Medieval Hungary’, in Marc A. Meyer, The Culture of Christendom
(London, 1993), pp. 269-79.

64 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
as Latin, German, French and Italian (below, p. 117).12 Linguistic plural¬
ism was particularly common in East-Central Europe, where speakers
of Hungarian and Slovak, Czech and German, or Croat and Italian
lived close together. In the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, at least five
spoken vernaculars coexisted: Lithuanian, Polish, German, Ruthenian
and Latvian.
- Finally, the term ‘rise’, although more neutral than ‘triumph’ or ‘eman¬
cipation’, does suffer from the disadvantage of ambiguity. It may refer to
an increase in prestige, in the number of speakers, or in the number of
functions. There is also the implication that the trend is irresistible. This
implication is a misleading one, at least on occasion. After all, in the case
of French one might just as reasonably speak of the Renaissance as the
age of the collapse of what had once been a French linguistic empire,
extending in the late Middle Ages to England, Spain, Italy, Germany,
Hungary and Cyprus.13 There was also a German linguistic empire at
this time, in Central Europe and the Baltic world, but it declined much
more slowly, as we shall see.
For these reasons, what follows is intended to offer a few qualifications
to the Whig or orthodox account, adopting a comparative approach and
distinguishing between the history of different vernaculars and between
different linguistic domains.
A comparative approach to the history of the enlargement of the vocab¬
ulary of different vernaculars would be particularly useful. Unfortunately,
the statistical work that has been carried out on French and in still more
detail on English has not yet been emulated for other languages.14
In the case of English, the contribution of a number of individuals to
the resources of the language has also been studied. We know, for instance,
that Thomas More coined the terms ‘absurdity’, ‘exaggerate’ and ‘frivolous’,
while Thomas Elyot was responsible for ‘accommodate’, ‘frugality’ and
‘modesty’. As for Shakespeare, he coined some seventeen hundred neolo¬
gisms, derived in the main from Latin, and about two-thirds of these, from
‘antipathy’ to ‘vast’, were accepted into the language. It has been calculated
that more than thirty-eight thousand words entered English between 1450
and 1750, with the high point ol word-coining occurring in the twenty
12 Christian S. Stang, Die west-russische Kanzleisprache des Grossfiirstentums Litauen (Oslo, 1935);
Randolph C. Head, A Plurilingual Family in the Sixteenth Century’, Sixteenth-Century Journal
16 (1995), pp. 577-93.
13 Brunot, Languefrant;aise, vol. 1, pp. 376-417.
14 Pierre Guiraud, l.es motsetrangers (Paris, 1965); Richard Wermser, StatistischeStudienzurEntwicklung
des englischen Wortschatzes (Bern, 1976); cf. Charles L. Barber, Early Modern English (Cambridge,
## 1976).

Vernaculars in competition 65
years between 1590 and 1609, when some six thousand terms were added
to the language.15
## THE RENAISSANCE AND THE PRAISES OF THE VERNACULAR
Another important change in this period was the rise in the status of the
vernacular, or more exactly of some vernaculars. Like orations and treatises
on the dignity and excellence of humanity, the praises of the vernacular were
a Renaissance genre. Humanists such as Romolo Amaseo, Carlo Sigonio and
Uberto Foglietta entered the debate to argue for the excellence of Latin,
as we have seen (above, p. 55), and others to praise Hebrew. In Eastern
Christendom, at the end of the sixteenth century, Ivan Vysenskyi called
Church Slavonic 'the most fruitful of all languages and God’s favourite’,
while Latin was the language of the devil.16
However, these scholars were outnumbered by the supporters of the ver¬
naculars. The printing of Dante’s treatise on the eloquence of the vernacular
in 1529 seems to have set off a chain reaction, beginning in the 1540s.
Select printed defences of the vernacular, 1529-1663
1529 Dante, De vulgari eloquentia
1540 J. de Barros, Louvor de nossa linguagern
1542 S. Speroni, Dialogo della lingua
1549 J. Du Bellay, Deffense et illustration de la langue frangaise
1574 M. Viziana, Alabanqas de las lenguas . . . castellanay valenciana
1579 H. Estienne, Precedence de la langue frangaise
1586 S. Stevin, Weerdigheyt der duytsche tael
1589 J. Rybinski, De lingua polonicapraestantia et utilitate
1615 R. Carew, On the Excellency of the English Tongue
1617 M. Opitz, De contemptu linguae teutonicae
1642 J. Rist, Rettung der edlen Teutschen
1663 J. G. Schottel, Lob der Teutschen Haubtsprache
15 Bryan A. Garner, ‘Shakespeare’s Latinate Neologisms’, Shakespeare Studies 15 (1982), pp. 149-70;
Terttu Nevaainen, ‘Lexis and Semantics’, in Lass, History of the English Language vol. ill, pp. 332-
458, at p. 341.
16 Quoted in Antoine Martel, La langue polonaise dans les pays Ruthenes: Ukraine et Russie Blanche, 1569-
i66y (Lille, 1938), pp. 72-3, and Bohdan Strumins’kyi, The Language Question in the Ukrainian
Lands before the Nineteenth Century’, in Picchio and Goldblatt, Aspects, vol. 2, pp. 9-47, at
pp. 16-17.

66 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In the sixteenth century, the historian Joao de Barros and Pedro de
Magalhaes de Gandavo wrote in praise of Portuguese, the humanists
Alessandro Citolini, Sperone Speroni and Lionardo Salviati in favour of
Italian, the poet Joachim Du Bellay, the writer Jean Tahureau and the
scholar-printer Henri Estienne in support of French, the Valencian Martin
Viziana in praise ofSpanish, the mathematician Simon Stevin and thewriter
Hendrik Spieghel in defence of Dutch, while Jacob Rybinski, a teacher in
a grammar school in Torun (writing in Latin), made a case for Polish and
the antiquary and poet Richard Carew for English (written in the 1590s,
Carew’s work was published in the next century). In 1589, the scholar
Gudbrandur Thorlaksson wrote that Icelandic, the language of the sagas,
was more worthy of praise than many other languages.17
In the seventeenth century, the poets Martin Opitz and Johann Rist and
the polymath Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (among others) wrote in defence
of German; Georg Stiernhielm, also a poet, in praise of Swedish; and the
Jesuit Bohuslav Balbin in favour of Czech, while Dominique Bouhours
(another Jesuit), Francois Charpentier and Louis Le Laboureur continued
to support French. In the eighteenth century, it would be the turn of Otto
Sperling to write in praise of Danish, Janos Ribinyi in praise of Hungarian
and Vasily Trediakovsky in praise of Russian.
The genre included the praise of languages that are now considered to
be dialects, among them Milanese, Bolognese and Neapolitan. For exam¬
ple, the Milanese writer Giovanni Ambrogio Biffi described ‘our language'
(1el nost lenguag) in his Prissian de Milan (1606) as ‘the purest, the most
beautiful and the best that can be found’ {el piii pur, el pile bel e el mid che
se possa trova).
The main point of all these orations or treatises was to stress the riches,
abundance or copiousness of one language and the poverty of its rivals.
Take the case of Dutch, or Flemish, for example. Simon Stevin of Bruges
wrote of its ‘wealth’ (rijcbeyt), describing the language as superior to Latin
and Greek and as designed by nature for technical treatises such as the art
of weighing. He criticized ‘foreign despisers’ of the language and praised
Dutch for its brevity, its clarity, and the ease with which compound words
could be created in order to express new meanings. Hendrik Spieghel of
Amsterdam argued that Netherlanders should take pride in their language
following the example of the Italians, the French and the English, and
agreed with Stevin about the wealth of Dutch and its propensity to create
1 I’icrrc Halleux, ‘Le purisme islandais’, I'It tides Germaniques 20 (1965), pp. 417—27, at p. 418.

Vernaculars in competition 67
compounds such as handschoen for gloves (‘hand-shoes’) or woordboek for
dictionary (‘word-book’).'8
The negative judgements passed on other languages are often memorable.
Erasmus, for instance, described French in his book on the education of
children as a ‘barbarous’ language with ‘harsh sounds ... which are scarcely
within the realm of human speech’, while another Flemish scholar of the
time called it ‘the scum of Latin’ (.spuma linguae latinae).ic> Barros criti¬
cized what he called the ‘gypsy accent of Seville’ (cecear cigana de Sevilla,
a reference to the southern habit of replacing ‘th’ by ‘s’). He also cited
a proverb to the effect that ‘The Spaniards weep, the Italians howl and
the French sing’ (Espanhaes choram, Italianos uivam, Franceses cantam).xo
Estienne quoted the same proverb in an amplified form: ‘the Italians sigh,
the Spaniards groan, the Germans howl and the French sing’ (or ‘crow’:
Balant Itali, gemunt Hispani, ululant Germani, cantant Galli). The pun
‘cantant Galli’, suggests that the Latin version was the original one.
In the seventeenth century, Bouhours developed this idea still further,
allowing a character in one of his dialogues to claim that ‘The Chinese,
and almost all the peoples of Asia, sing; the Germans rattle; the Spaniards
declaim; the Italians sigh; the English whistle. To be exact, only the French
speak’ (Les Chinois, etpresque tous lespeoples de I’Asie, chantent; lesAllemands
ralent; les Espagnols declament; les Italiens soupirent; les Anglais sifflent. II n’y
a proprement que les Frangais qui par lent)!'
The harshest critics of a particular language are often the neighbours.
A sixteenth-century Swedish bishop complained that the Danes ‘do not
trouble to speak like other people’, but ‘force their words out as if they wish
to cough, and seem almost on purpose to twist their words in their throats
before they come out’.22 An eighteenth-century English visitor to Wales
compared the sound of Welsh to ‘the musical clack of a flock of geese when
highly irritated’.23 It was a speaker of Danish who recorded the anecdote
‘that the devil once threw all the ancient and modern languages into a brass
18 Simon Stevin, Works, vol. i, ed. Eduard J. Dijksterhuis (Amsterdam, 1955), pp. 58-93; Hendrik L.
Spieghel, Tweespraak (Groningen, 1913), especially chapter 7.
19 Jacob de Meyere, quoted in Charles A. J. Armstrong, ‘The Language Question in the Low Countries’,
in John R. Hale, Roger Highfield and Beryl Smalley (eds.), Europe in the Late Middle Ages (London,
1965), pp. 386-409, at p. 407m
20 Joao de Barros, DiAlogo (1540: ed. Luciana Stegnano Picchio, Modena, 1959), pp. 76-8.
11 Dominique Bouhours, Entretiens dAriste et dEugene (1671: repr. Paris, 1962), p. 39.
22 Quoted in Einar Haugen, The Scandinavian Languages: an Introduction to their History (London,
1976), p. 326.
23 Quoted in Geraint H. Jenkins (ed.), The Welsh Language before the Industrial Revolution (Cardiff,
## 1997). P- 65.

## 68
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
pot, and that, when the pot began to boil, he made the English language
out of the scum’.24
On the positive side, the point was to show that one’s own language
was as good as Latin, Greek or Italian, if not better. For example, the
Spaniard Pedro Mexia declared that ‘Castilian does not need to concede the
advantage to any other language’ {la lengua castellana no tien... porque recon-
ozca ventaja a otra ninguna).1’' Not to be outdone, Du Bellay claimed that
French had as much grace as Latin and Greek, while Estienne argued that
it was ‘more capable of eloquence or capable of greater eloquence than the
others’ (plus capable d'eloquence, ou capable de plus grand eloquence que les
autres). The idea that French is distinguished by its clarity goes back to
the middle of the seventeenth century, when Vaugelas declared that it is
‘plus ennemi des equivoques et de toute sorte d’obscurite’ than any other
language.26 A few years later, Bouhours argued that ‘notre langue est capable
de routes choses’, contrasting it unfavourably with Italian and Spanish, the
only rivals he considered to be worth discussing at all.2
For his part, Martin Luther claimed in his table talk that the German
language is the most perfect of all’ (Germanica autem lingua omnium est
perfectissima: no. 4018). The sixteenth-century translator Johann Fischart
agreed, arguing in his vivid way that ‘our language is a language too and
can name a sack as well as the Latin saccus' (Unser sprach ist auch ein sprach
und kan so wohl ein Sack nennen, als die Latinen saccus).1* The poet Martin
Opitz declared that German possessed the majesty of Spanish, the decorum
of Italian and the charm of French.29 Turning eastwards, we find that the
printer Flieronim Wietor claimed in 1542 that Polish was not inferior to
any language, while Marcin Siennik declared, in the preface to a herbal
published in 1568, that ‘The Polish language . . . can refer to everything
without the help of neighbours’.30
As for English, Thomas More had already claimed in the book he wrote
against the reformer William Tyndale that the language was not ‘barren’
but ‘plenteous enough’. The schoolmaster Richard Mulcaster declared that
24 Ludvig Holberg, Memoirs, ed. and trans. Stewart E. Fraser (Leiden, 1970), p. 220. A slightly less
picturesque version was recorded by Johann Schottel: 'Denn als in einem Topfe . . . alle Sprachen
gekocht worden, ware der Schaum davon die Englische Sprache geworden’: quoted in Sigfrid von
der Schulenburg, Leibniz als Sprachforscher (Frankfurt, 1973), p. 13411.
15 Jose Francisco Pastor (ed.), Las apologias de la lengua castellana en elsiglo de oro (Madrid. 1929), p. 34.
26 Brunot, LangueJranfaise, vol. 111, pp. 46-56. 27 Bouhours, Entretiens, p. 46.
2K Quoted in Walter E. Spongier, Johann Fischart (Goppingen, 1969), p. 258.
29 Martin Opitz, Aristarchus (1617: in his Gesammelte Werke, Stuttgart, 1968, 53-75), p. 64.
30 Claude Backvis, Quelques remarques sur le bilinguisme latino-polonais dans la Pologne du xvie siecle
(Brussels, 1958), pp. 19—21. Cl. the texts collected in Witold Faszycki, Obroncy jqzyka polskiego
(Wroclaw, 1953).

Vernaculars in competition 69
‘I do not think that any language ... is better able to utter all arguments’
than English, and that it was ‘not any whit behind either the subtle Greek...
or the stately Latin’. His colleague Alexander Gill agreed, claiming that no
language is more graceful, elegant, apt or offers more possibilities for the
expression of every thought’ {aut cultior, aut ornatior, aut ad omnia animi
sensa explicanda aptior aut facundior) V
In the eighteenth century, the claim was extended to still more languages.
In a treatise on the primacy of the Slavonic language over the Teutonic,
Vasili Trediakovsky described Slavonic as the oldest European language.
The writer Mikhaylo Lomonosov declared in the dedication to his Russian
Grammar that ‘Russian is not inferior to any of the languages of Europe’,
possessing as it did ‘the grandeur of Spanish, the vitality of French, the
firmness of German, the tenderness of Latin, and besides these the rich¬
ness and forceful conciseness of expression of Greek and Latin’. In similar
fashion, Catherine the Great remarked to princess Dashkova that Russian
united ‘the strength, the richness and the energy of the German with the
sweetness of the Italian’. According to the Hungarian Janos Ribinyi, ‘Italian
is pleasant, French is beautiful, German earnest: but all these qualities are
so united in Hungarian that it is difficult to say wherein its superiority
consists’.32
From an Olympian or comparative point of view, the texts undermine
one another, since it is obviously impossible for every language to be the
noblest, the richest or the oldest in Europe, or even in the world. The orig¬
inal language spoken by Adam was identified as Flemish by the Antwerp
humanist Johannes Goropius and as Swedish by the seventeenth-century
polymath Olaf Rudbeck of Uppsala, while some eighteenth-century welsh
men thought it was Welsh.33 These claims might be described as a form
of collective narcissism, an extreme case of the still common belief that
one’s own language, like one’s nation, region, city or family - not to
mention football team - is the best. Yet the way in which these trea¬
tises should be read remains a problem, less simple than it may appear.
31 Richard Mulcaster, The First Part of the Elementarie (1582: facsimile repr., Menston, 1970); Alexander
Gill, Logonomia anglica (1619: ed. and trans. Bror Danielsson and Arvid Gabrielson, Stockholm,
## 1972).
3Z Lomonosov quoted in Christopher D. Buck, ‘The Russian Language Question in the Imperial
Academy of Sciences’, in Picchio and Goldblatt, Aspects, vol. 2, pp. 187-233, at p. 218; cf. Antoine
Martel, Michel Lomonosov et la langue litteraire russe (Paris, 1933), p. 20; Catherine quoted in Hans
Rogger, National Consciousness in Eighteenth-Century Russia (Cambridge, MA, i960), p. 113; Ribinyi
quoted in Joshua A. Fishman, Language in Sociocultural Change (New York, 1972), p. 65.
33 Arno Borst, Der Turmbau von Babel (4 vols. in 6, Stuttgart, 1957—63), pp. 1215—19,1339—41: Jenkins,
Welsh Language, pp. 378—9.

## 70
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Like the treatises on the dignity of humanity, they may be rhetorical exer¬
cises by writers equally capable of arguing the opposite case. 1 hey may be
expressions of confidence, but they may also be signs of an inferiority com¬
plex relative to Latin, Italian, or, from the seventeenth century onwards,
## French.
## COMPETITION
The treatises or orations discussed above give a vivid impression of conflict,
the ‘linguistic battle’ or the ‘war of languages’.34 It may be even more
illuminating to speak of linguistic competition, of the struggle for the
centre and of attempts to marginalize rivals.35 As Henri Estienne put it in
his defence of French, ‘our language had two competitors {competiteurs),
Italian and Spanish’.36 In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, German
speakers, including Leibniz, sometimes express a fear that their language is
lagging behind Italian, French and English.37
Remember the number of vernaculars in early modern Europe, between
forty and seventy (above, p. 8). If there were winners in this competition,
there obviously had to be losers. If the ‘rise’ of a language is a meaningful
expression, the movement must take place at the expense of another. There
were ‘master languages’, as one Briton called them in 1650, and there were
‘subordinate languages’.38 There were contests for territory and even some¬
times for survival. The process that the French linguist Louis-Jean Calvet
calls glottophagie, the big fish swallowing the smaller, was already noticeable
at this time.39
At the extreme, there are recorded cases of language extinction, or, in the
current phrase, ‘language death’.40 Gothic, for instance, was still spoken in
the Crimea in the middle of the fifteenth century, when it was heard and
recorded by a visiting Venetian merchant, but it seems to have disappeared
soon after this time.41 Around the year 1600, Curonian became extinct,
34 Ricardo Garcia Carcel, ‘La lengua e la batalla lingiiistica’, in his Historia de Cataluna: siglos xvi—xvii
(Barcelona, 1985), pp. 81-112, at p. 81; Louis-Jean Calvet, Language Wars and Linguistic Politics (1987:
English translation, Oxford, 1998).
35 Ronald Wardhaugh, Languages in Competition (Oxford, 1987).
36 Henri Estienne, La precedence du langage frant;ois (1579: ed. Edmond Huguet, Paris, 1896), p. 14.
37 Jurgen Schiewe, Die Macht der Sprache: Eine Geschichte der Sprachlichkeit von der Antike bis zur
Gegenwart (Munich, 1998), p. 70.
,s Richard Flecknoe, A Relation of Ten Years’ Travels (London, no date, but c. 1650), p. 106. The master
languages, according to Flecknoe, were French, Spanish and (somewhat optimistically) English.
## 39 Calvet, Language Wars.
40 Daniel Nettle and Suzanne Romaine, Vanishing Voices (London, 2000); David Crystal, Language
Death (Cambridge, 2000).
41 Macdonald Stearns, Crimean Gothic: Analysis and Etymology of the Corpus (Saratoga, CA, 1978),
pp. 6-7.

## 7i
Vernaculars in competition
replaced by its neighbours Lithuanian and Latvian.42 In the late seventeenth
century, it was the turn of Old Prussian. On the title-page of a catechism in
that language someone wrote around the year 1700 that ‘This old Prussian
language has now quite completely vanished for ever’ (Diese alte Preusnische
Sprache ist nunmehr gantz und gar vergangen ivorden), adding that an old
man who lived on the Courland Spit and still knew the language had died in
- Around the middle of the eighteenth century Polabian disappeared,
a Slavonic language spoken along the Elbe.43
Further west, a relatively well-documented case of language extinction
is that of Cornish. In 1542, it was reported that in Cornwall ‘there be many
men and women the which cannot speak one word of English but all
Cornish’.44 By 1600, however, Cornish speakers had diminished to some
twenty thousand, and a hundred years later, to about five thousand. Dolly
Pentreath of Mousehole, who died in 1777, has sometimes been described
as the last native speaker of the language.
However, an unqualified story of the ‘fall’ of certain languages would be
as gross a simplification as that of the ‘rise’ of others. As a social historian of
Welsh puts it, ‘a simple linear geographical and chronological perspective of
the steady retreat of the Welsh language must be modified by considerations
of language maintenance, class and occupation’ (and, it should be added,
by considerations of linguistic domain as well).45
## LINGUISTIC DOMAINS
Much more common than language extinction was the disappearance of
certain languages from certain public domains such as courts and schools,
in other words a kind of linguistic retirement into private life.46
For example, Galician is said to have ‘disappeared’ from written sources
in the early sixteenth century (though it is attested in private letters a
hundred years later) and did not make its reappearance until after the year
1800.47 Frisian too was in decline in the domain of writing. The last official
document in that language dates from 1573, and Dutch was becoming the
language of the church, the towns, and the elites.48
42 William B. Lockwood, A Panorama of the Indo-European Languages (London, 1972), p. 138.
43 William R. Schmalstieg, An Old Prussian Grammar (University Park, MD, 1974), p. 3; Banfi,
Formazione, p. 153.
44 Quoted Lockwood, Panorama, p. 53. 45 Jenkins, Welsh Language, p. 53.
46 Crystal, Language Death, pp. 22, 83.
47 Glanville Price (ed.), Encyclopaedia of the Languages of Europe (Oxford, 1998), p. 185; contrast
Fernando Bouza, Corn manuscrito: una historia cultural delsiglo de oro (Madrid, 2001), pp. 141-2.
48 Cor van Bree, ‘The Development of so-called Town Frisian’, in Peter Bakker and Maarten Mous
(eds.), Mixed Languages (Amsterdam, 1994), pp. 69-82.

## 72-
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Why did some languages decline in this way? There are two rival expla¬
nations, one political and the other social: pressure from outside or a change
of mind (what nationalists would call 'treason’) from within.
Political explanations stress deliberate acts by governments, which were
as rare before 1789 as they were common after that date. Social explanations,
by contrast, stress the agency of ordinary speakers, who may internalize the
idea that their language is inferior. Especially important is the pressure
of parents on children to learn and use a more prestigious language that
offers more opportunities for social mobility than their own. In sixteenth-
century Wales, some parents began to send their sons to school in England,
to Shrewsbury for instance.49
Hence, the children sometimes abandoned their native language alto¬
gether, shifting in this period from Welsh and Irish to English, from Breton
and Occitan to French, Catalan to Spanish and so on. More frequently,
though, they practised ‘diglossia’, using different languages with different
people or in different domains. In early modern Catalonia, for instance, the
elites might use Spanish out of deference to Castilians if they were present,
but Catalan on formal occasions in public, while switching between the
two languages in their family letters.50
Within the same group, different languages might be considered appro¬
priate for different purposes. In the sixteenth century, the great Polish poet
Jan Kochanowski once apologized for writing a letter in Polish, while as we
have seen (above, p. 43) cardinal Hosius thought that language inappropri¬
ate for writing about theology.5’ Distinctions obviously need to be drawn,
including those between the domains of law and administration, religion,
and literature and learning.
## LAW AND ADMINISTRATION
Attempts by governments to impose certain forms of written language
have a long history, especially in the domains of law and administration.
One scholar has spoken of an official 'language policy’ in the time of
Charlemagne, since the king tried to impose a reformed version of Latin on
his realm (together with a reformed script, the famous Carolingian minus¬
cule), although he also encouraged the use of German for administrative
4‘; Charles W. J. Withers, Gaelic in Scotland, 1698-1981: the Geographical History of a Language
(Edinburgh, 1984), p. 79.
' Joan-1 .Inis Marfany, La llengua maltractada: III castelL) i el catala a Catalunya delseglexvi alseglexix
(Barcelona, 2001), pp. 121, 310, etc.
Backvis, Quelques rernarques, pp. 6, 8n.

## 73
Vernaculars in competition
purposes.52 The phrase ‘language policy’ has also been used about the
actions of the Dutch East India Company, and again about kings Henry IV
and Henry V of England, in the course of arguing that their support of
English as a chancery language, for instance, at the expense of Latin and
French, was a way of gaining legitimacy for their new dynasty.53
The problem with the modern phrase ‘language policy’ is that it implies
more than a personal interest by the ruler in linguistic matters, as in Charle¬
magne’s case. It implies planning for change, rather than reacting to prob¬
lems as they arise. In the case of the Dutch East India Company, its rulings
have been described as ‘rarely consistent’, so that it might be better to speak
of‘reactions’ rather than of a policy.54 For this reason it might be wise to
avoid the term in the case of Europe before 1789, or at least to emphasize
its limitations.55
The point is that interest in language on the part of governments was
largely confined to two domains. In the first place, it concerned the language
of administration, used in departments such as the chancery, an office
concerned with the composition, dispatch, receipt and filing ol letters. In
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, there was a shift from Latin to the
vernacular in certain chanceries - in the German states, for example, in
Milan, and in England in the reign of Henry V, although French was still
used in the offices of the Privy Seal and the Signet, so we are told, ‘until
well into the fifteenth century’.56
As for the courts, the royal ordinance of Villers-Cotterets (1539), replacing
Latin by French in this domain, is especially well-known. The ordinance,
which refers to langaige maternel Franpoys, has sometimes been interpreted
as ‘the first official act of a royal policy of linguistic unification’.57 How¬
ever, to see Villers-Cotterets as a step towards the unification policies of
the French Revolution would be a case of the Whig interpretation at its
most misleading. According to one famous sixteenth-century lawyer, Pierre
52 Michael Richter, ‘Die Sprachenpolitik Karls des Grossen’ (1982; repr. Richter, Studies in Medieval
Language and Culture, Dublin, 1995), pp. 86-108.
53 Kees Groeneboer, Gateway to the West: the Dutch Language in Colonial Indonesia, 1600-1950: a history
of language policy (1993: English translation, Amsterdam, 1998); John H. Fisher, ‘A Language Policy
for Lancastrian England’ (1992: repr. Fisher, The Emergence of Standard English, Lexington, KY, 1996,
pp. 16-35).
54 Groeneboer, Gateway, p. 59.
55 Henri Peyre, La royaute et les languesprovinciales (Paris, 1933), pp. 97,107,117,122,166, 250.
56 Maurizio Vitale, La lingua volgare della cancelleria viscontea-sforzesca nel ’400 (Varese-Milan, 1953);
Malcolm Richardson, ‘Henry V, the English Chancery and Chancery English’, Speculum 55 (1980),
pp. 726-50; on the Privy Seal and the Signet, Helen Suggett, ‘The Use of French in England in the
Later Middle Ages’, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 28 (1946), pp. 61-84, at P- 67.
57 Danielle Trudeau, ‘L’ordonnance de Villers-Cotterets et la langue franfaise: histoire ou inter¬
pretation?’ Bibliotheque d'Humanisme et Renaissance 45 (1983), pp. 461-72, at p. 461.

## 74
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Rebuffi, the term ‘French’ should be interpreted in a wide sense because the
ordinance was not intended to exclude other vernaculars from the courts.'8
The French edict was part of a European trend. In Poland, for instance,
the Sejm (Diet) ruled in 1539, the year of Villers-Cotterets, that all laws and
edicts should be published in Polish (with a summary in Latin). In 1560,
Emmanuel Philibert of Savoy ordered the use of French {langage vulgaire)
to replace Latin in the courts and the Senate.59
In other cases, the exclusion of some ‘subordinate’ vernaculars from the
official domain was less ambiguous than in the case of Villers-Cotterets. In
the Duchy of Burgundy, for instance, French was the dominant language,
used at meetings of the Estates and also in the administration. That this
dominance was resented became clear on the death of Charles the Bold
in 1477, when there was a successful move to make Flemish or Dutch the
language of the Estates and also that of the administration in the northern
provinces of Holland and Zeeland.60
The Act of Union between England and Wales of 1536 required courts to
be kept and oaths taken ‘in the English tongue’, complaining that the Welsh
‘have and do daily use a speech nothing like, ne consonant to the natural
mother tongue used within this Realm’ (in practice, though, Welsh contin¬
ued to be used in the courts).61 In similar fashion the 1537 ‘Act of the English
Order, Habit and Language limited the use of Irish in public. In 1561,
the Inquisition made the use of Castilian obligatory in trials in Catalonia.
The trend towards the administrative use of a few vernaculars, whether
at the expense of other vernaculars or of Latin, continued after 1600. After
the battle of the White Mountain (1620) that led to the suppression of the
revolt of Bohemia against the emperor Ferdinand II, Czech was replaced
by German in the public sphere. In the Swedish empire in the seven¬
teenth century, the government attempted to restrict the use of Danish and
Finnish/’" In the 1680s, the French state imposed the use of French in the
courts and administration of the newly conquered territories of Flanders
58 Peyre, Royaute, pp. 58-91; Piero Fiorelli, ‘Pour l'interpretation de l'ordonnance de Villers-Cotterets’,
Lefran^ais moderne 18 (1950), pp. 277-88; Pierre Bee, La langue occitane (1963: 2nd ed„ Paris, 1967).
59 Geoffrey Symcox, ‘The Savoyard State: a Negative Case-Study in the Politics of Linguistic Unifica¬
tion’, in Chiappelli, The Fairest Flower, pp. 185-91, at pp. 187-8.
60 Armstrong, ‘The Language Question in the Low Countries’, pp. 386-409.
61 Peter R. Roberts, ' 1 he Welsh Language, English Law and Tudor Legislation’, Transactions Cymm-
rodorion (1989), pp. 19-75. at p. 27; Jenkins, Welsh Language, pp. 69, 153-80.
62 Peter Skautrup, Del danske sprogs historic, vol. 11 (Copenhagen, 1947); Michael Roberts, The Swedish
Imperial Experience, 1560-1/18 (Cambridge, 1979), pp. 109-10; Lars S. Vikor, ‘Northern Europe:
Languages as Prime Markers of Ethnic and National Identity’, in Stephen Barbour and Cathy
Carmichael (eds.), Language and Nationalism in Europe (Oxford, 2000), pp. 105-29, where it is
claimed that the Swedes were ‘prohibiting the use of Danish altogether’ in SkSne.

## 75
Vernaculars in competition
and Alsace, and in 1700 in Roussillon (formerly part of Catalonia) as well.
In 1696, Polish became the official language in the Lithuanian as well as the
Polish part of the Commonwealth. In 1716, Castilian was made obligatory
in cases before the Catalan high court, the Audiencia.
## LANGUAGE AND POLITICS
If it is anachronistic to speak of conscious ‘language policies’ at this time,
this does not mean that connections between language and politics were
lacking. The success of some European vernaculars in this period was as
much the consequence of the rise of centralizing states - and the new state
churches that emerged from the Reformation - as of the campaigns waged
by poets and scholars.
The expansion of the vernaculars into the domain of law and govern¬
ment was not simply a matter of administrative convenience. Once again,
community is the clue. This expansion was an act, or succession of acts, of
symbolic importance, signalling the rise of new communities or new con¬
ceptions of community. We can see this symbolic importance more clearly
if we remember that it was only some vernaculars that expanded in this way,
and that they did so at the expense of other vernaculars as well as Latin:
French at the expense of Occitan, English at the expense of Welsh, Spanish
at the expense of Catalan, German at the expense of Czech, Polish at the
expense of Ruthenian, Danish at the expense of Norwegian and so on.63
The idea that language is the companion of empire became a common¬
place in this period, as we have seen (above, p. 20)- As the character Eudoxus
remarked in the dialogue on Ireland by the poet Edmund Spenser, ‘it hath
been ever the use of the conqueror to despise the language of the conquered
and to force him by all means to learn his’. This assumption is surely the
clue to the advice given to Queen Elizabeth in 1582 by Sir John Perrott,
President of Munster, to issue orders ‘for enlarging the English tongue and
extinguishing the Irish’. In 1695, an act went through Parliament ‘for root¬
ing out the Irish language’- in other words, what is now known as Scottish
## Gaelic.64
In the case of Spanish, one argument in favour of the public use of
Castilian in Catalonia was that it was ‘the common idiom of the Spanish
On Norwegian, Didrik A. Seip, Dansk og Norsk i Norge i eldre tider (Oslo, 1932).
64 Paul Walsh, The Irish Language and the Reformation’, Irish Theological Quarterly 15 (1920),
pp. 239-50, at p. 243; Edmund Spenser, A View of the Present State of Ireland, ed. William L.
Renwick (Oxford, 1970), p. 67. Cf. Victor Durkacz, The Decline of the Celtic Languages (Edinburgh,
1983); Patricia Palmer, Language and Conquest in Early Modern Ireland (Cambridge, 2001).

j6 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
monarchy’ (el idioma comun de la Monarquia de Espana).6'' Philip IPs pro¬
hibition of the use of Arabic in Spain (1567) fits in with this idea. However,
the king’s main concern was probably with Arabic as the language of Islam,
and his fear was that his Morisco subjects, officially Christian, were really
crypto-Muslims. It is worth noting that in mid-seventeenth-century Spain,
the count-duke of Olivares, despite his commitment to centralization and
his clash with the Catalans, did not concern himself with the language
question. 6
Again, in 1678, King Karl XI of Sweden ordered Swedish to be used in
Skane and other southern provinces recently conquered from Denmark.
Teachers were sent to Skane to teach the children how to speak and write
in the new language. The University of Lund had been founded in 1666
as part ol the same campaign to make Skane more Swedish (for further
details, below, pp. i62ff.).67
In France, Louis XIV’s minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert recommended the
use of French as a means of making the inhabitants of the countries ceded
to the king at the treaty of Westphalia used to our manners and customs’
(,accoustumer les peuples des pays cedes au Roy par le traite de Munster a nos
moeurs eta nos coutumes) .6S In similar fashion, the secretary of the intendant
of Alsace in 1735 declared himself in favour of‘obliging the inhabitants of
this region to speak the language of their sovereign’, because they still had
the imperial eagle ‘engraved on their hearts’.69
In these cases, relatively rare before 1789, we find governments that
are actively concerned with the everyday language of the majority of the
population, a concern that would become much more general in the nine¬
teenth century (below, pp. 163LF.)-
## THE DOMAIN OF LEARNING
Although it was becoming increasingly common for students to learn mod¬
ern languages at university, the employment of the vernaculars for teaching
purposes continued to be virtually prohibited, despite protests from a few
academics. In France, scholars ol the calibre ofjean Bodin and Louis Le Roy
supported the use of the vernacular in the university, as did Laurentius Fries
and Baltasar Schupp in the German-speaking world. Fries, for instance,
65 Quoted in Garcia Carcel, Cataluna, p. 104.
66 Alain Milliou. 'Les politiques de la langue it l'ipoque moderne de l’Europe et I'Amerique', in Marie-
Cdcile B6nassy-Berling, Jean-Pierre Clement and Alain Milhou (eds.), Langues et cultures en Amerique
espagnole coloniale (Paris, 1993), pp. 15-40, at p. 30.
r'7 Vikor, ‘Northern Europe’; Skautrup, Danske sprog, p. 294.
6 Quoted in Peyre, Royaute, pp. 166-7. 69 Ibid., pp. 162-3.

## 77
Vernaculars in competition
suggested that medical books be written in German because that language
is no less worthy’ than Latin, Greek, Italian or Spanish, while Schupp
declared that ‘it is possible to cure a sick person as well in German as in
Greek or Arabic’.70
In practice, it was only very slowly that the mother tongues began to
infiltrate academic life. It is significant that among the early examples of the
shift towards the vernacular we find educational institutions that were not
universities. For example, Spanish was the language of a new academy for
the discussion of natural philosophy, active in the 1580s. Lectures were given
in English at Gresham College London, founded in the 1590s and oriented
towards an unusually wide public. The equivalent in Paris of Gresham
College was the series of lectures organized by the journalist Theophraste
Renaudot between 1633 and 1642. The lectures, which took place on
Monday afternoons, discussed a variety of topics, including medicine, agri¬
culture, navigation and politics. The lectures were open to everyone and
the use of French was required.71
It was in the German-speaking world that the campaign to introduce
the vernacular into the universities had most effect. In the early sixteenth
century, the physician Paracelsus had insisted on lecturing in German at
the University of Basel, but - for this reason among others - his academic
career did not last very long. In the late seventeenth century, the polymath
Christian Thomasius was allowed to lecture in German at the university
of Halle, another new foundation, after causing a scandal by his attempt
to do the same in Leipzig (his announcement of a course of lectures in the
vernacular in Leipzig in 1687 has been called ‘a symbolic gesture reminis¬
cent of Luther’s nailing his theses to the door of the church at Wittenberg’).
Christian Wolff’s creation of a German vocabulary to discuss mathemat¬
ics and philosophy encouraged the process of vernacularization in the
eighteenth century.72
In other countries there were similar timid moves towards teaching in the
vernacular. In 1588, a lectureship in Tuscan was founded at the University
of Siena, and the lecturers presumably gave their lectures in that language.
Olof Rudbeck began giving his lectures in Swedish at Uppsala University in
70 Schiewe, Macht, pp. 56-7, 62.
71 Harald Weinrich, Wege der Sprachkultur{St\m^n, 1985), p. 158; Christopher Hill, Intellectual Origins
of the English Revolution (Oxford, 1965), pp. 34-5; Howard M. Solomon, Public Welfare, Science and
Propaganda in Seventeenth-Century France (Princeton, 1972), p. 64.
72 Richard Hodermann, Universitatsvorlesungen in deutscher Sprache um die Wende des iy. Jahrhunderts
(Jena, 1891); Irmgard Weithase, Zur Geschichte dergesprochenen deutschen Sprache, vol. 1 (Tubingen,
1961), pp. 264-79; Schiewe, Macht, pp. 80-7; the comment on Thomasius in Eric A. Blackall, The
Emergence of German as a Literary Language, iyoo—ys (Cambridge, 1959), pp. 12—13.

yS Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
- In Paris, an edict of 1680 required lectures on French law to be given
in French. At the universities of Pisa and Naples in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, a compromise was established, with lectures in Latin
followed by explanations in the vernacular outside the lecture-room. 3 In
1734, a chair in Italian eloquence was founded at Turin. In 1765, Antonio
Genovesi began to lecture in Italian at the University of Naples, at a time
when the Neapolitan elite had chosen to speak as well as write the standard
language. In Moscow, Nikolai Popovsky lectured in Russian in the 1750s,
while the vernacular became the official language of instruction at the
university in 1767.
In the case of learned publications, a gradual decline of Latin is visible,
replaced by Italian, French, Spanish, English, and to a lesser extent other
languages such as German and Dutch. As was noted in the previous chapter
(above, p. 54), there was a steep decline after 1650 in the proportion of Latin
books offered for sale in the Frankfurt fairs. Descartes shifted to French for
his Discours de la methode, Galileo to Italian for his Saggiatore and other
works, and Newton to English for his Optics, while Robert Boyle, who
claimed he had no time to learn languages, always wrote in English.
In the case of natural philosophy, despite the international interest in
new discoveries, Latin suffered from two serious disadvantages. It offended
the purist because the need to coin new words for new objects and ideas
involved departures from the language of Cicero. The use of Latin also
excluded many people who were interested in scientific debates, among
them a considerable number of artisans. In other words, the new scientific
community did not coincide with the latinophone Respublica Litterarum.
## THE LANGUAGES OF RELIGION
The use of the vernacular in writing and print was also encouraged by
the Reformation, and, paradoxically enough, by the Counter-Reformation
as well.
The debut in print of some of the smaller European languages owed
more to the Reformation than to the Renaissance. For example, the first
Estonian book, printed in 1535, was a Lutheran catechism, and so was the
first printed book in Romanian (1544), in Lithuanian (1547) and 'n Slovene
(1551). In Romansh too, the first printed book (1557) was a catechism, and
in Welsh (1546) it was a prayer-book. Fhe first book printed in Sami, the
language of the Lapps, was an ABC published by a Lutheran pastor in
Stockholm in 1649.
73 Framjoise Waquet, Purler comme un livre (Paris, 1003), p. 85.

## 79
Vernaculars in competition
It is true that only some vernaculars or forms of the vernacular were used
in church. Slovak Lutherans, for example, worshipped in Czech, while
Occitan-speaking Calvinists worshipped in French and in moments of
inspiration their prophets might recite passages from the Bible, more espe¬
cially from the Psalms, in that language.74 All the same, their use in the
liturgy and in translations of the Bible did much to give certain vernaculars
more dignity.
In regions where more than one vernacular was spoken and written, as in
Lusatia, the upper classes faced a dilemma. The problem in this Lutheran
area was whether to give religious instruction to the peasants in German
or in Sorb (a language close to Slovak and Polish). The use of German was
supposed to civilize the people, but their difficulty in understanding that
language risked the perpetuation of what the clergy called superstition’ and
‘popery’. In the event, German was chosen for Lower Lusatia and Sorb for
## Upper Lusatia.75
In the Catholic world, as we saw in the previous chapter, Latin retained
its position as a sacred language. The Council of Trent rejected the use of the
vernacular in the liturgy and prohibited further translations of the Bible.
All the same, the vernacular might be used for other religious purposes,
and it often was. The first printed book in Albanian was a Missal (1555).
Vernacular catechisms were printed in large numbers and became a powerful
instrument in the service of reformed Catholicism. The catechism of the
Italian Jesuit Roberto Bellarmino, for instance, was translated into no fewer
than twenty-three European languages between 1600 and 1744.76
## TRANSLATIONS
The translation of other texts, whether from Latin and Greek into vernac¬
ular languages or from one vernacular into another, was a process which
accelerated in this period and had important consequences for many lan¬
guages, as some contemporaries were well aware. The impossibility of find¬
ing equivalents for some foreign expressions led to the coining of new
words. Hence, the translator Richard Eden observed in 1562 that English
was no longer ‘indigent’ but ‘enriched and amplified’ by translation.77
Translations from one European vernacular into another may be analysed
in two ways, according to the text’s original language, or according to what
74 Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, Lespaysans de Languedoc (Paris, 1966), p. 621.
75 Alfred Mietzsche, ‘Der Entstehung der obersorbischen Schriftsprache (1668-1728), Zeitschrifiper
Slavische Philologie 28 (i960), pp. 122—48.
76 Carlos Sommervogel et at, Bibliotheque de la Compagnie de Jesus (12 vols., Brussels, 1890—1932), sub
voce ‘Bellarmine’.
77 Quoted in Jones, Triumph, p. 92.

## 8o
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
translators call the ‘target language’. The ‘balance of trade’, as we might call
it, between vernaculars is a cultural indicator that deserves more study than
it has received so far.78 Few attempts have been made to compile complete
lists of translations from one vernacular into another, so the conclusions
that follow are necessarily impressionistic and provisional.79
To begin with the ‘exports’. In the case of Italy, their high level was
only to be expected, especially in the age of the Renaissance, with Ariosto,
Boccalini, Guarini, Guicciardini, Machiavelli, Petrarch and Tasso among
the authors most frequently translated. Spanish exports were also high in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, including works by Cervantes and the
devotional writer Luis de Granada, Gracian’s conduct books, Guevara’s
mirror for princes, and the account of China by Gonzalez de Mendoza.
The rise of French took place in the seventeenth century and of English
in the eighteenth century (with Locke and Richardson among the most
popular authors). In other words, the graph of translations from a particular
language is a rough indicator of the prestige of that language.
Translations into a particular language, on the other hand, may be read as
a sign that that culture was relatively open to foreign ideas. Italian imports
were relatively high, especially in the sixteenth century and from Spanish.
French imports were also high in the sixteenth century, with 1570—1600
as the peak period for translations from Italian (translations from Spanish
peaked a little later).80 England too had a high level of imports from Italian,
Spanish and French (about four hundred and fifty translations from Italian
were published between 1550 and 1660).81
In the case of Spain, on the other hand, imports seem to have been
relatively low, though not as low, in the sixteenth century at least, as tra¬
ditional stereotypes of the ‘closed country’ might suggest. As translations
into Spanish declined, translations into German began to rise. In East-
Central Europe, imports were also low, and they tended to be made from
Latin rather than the vernaculars. Erasmus, for instance, was translated into
Czech and Polish in the sixteenth century. Latin works by Jean Calvin and
the English Puritan William Perkins were translated into Hungarian. Both
the Constancy and the Politics of the humanist Justus Lipsius were translated
into Polish and Hungarian.
s For the period 1932-77, cf. Daniel Milo, ‘La bourse mondiale de la traduction: un baromctre culturel?'
Annales: economies, societes, civilisations 39 (1984), pp. 93-113.
79 Existing studies include Mary Augusta Scott, Elizabethan translations from the Italian (Boston, 1916);
Jean Balsamo, Repertoiredes traductions de I’italien 1370-1600 (Rome, 1992); Frank-Rutger Hausmann,
Bibliographic der deutschen Ubersetzungen aus deni italienischen bis 1730 (2 vols., Tubingen, 1992).
'So Jean Balsamo, Iraduire de I’italien: ambitions sociales et contraintes editoriales ^ la fin du i6e si£de’,
in I tominique de Courcelles (ed.), Iraduire et adapter it la Renaissance (Paris, 1998), pp. 89-98.
## Nl Scott, Elizabethan Translations.

Vernaculars in competition 81
I his pattern of linguistic exchange deserves more analysis than it has
received so far. Among the factors that need to be taken into account are
the attitudes of translators to their own vernacular, whether they considered
it appropriate for discussions of philosophy, for instance. Strange as it may
now seem, German was a language relatively poor in abstractions in this
period, creating an obstacle to certain kinds of translation. Although Leibniz
argued that German was an appropriate language for philosophy, it was only
in the eighteenth century that his advice began to be taken seriously.
## IMPERIALISM
The military metaphor of winners and losers criticized at the beginning
of this chapter seems to be inescapable. All the same, we can try to use it
without triumphalism, that is, without neglecting the losers and without
assuming that the successful languages were intrinsically better.
We might speak of ‘linguistic imperialism’, both literal and metaphor¬
ical. The metaphor of empire appealed to a number of writers in our
period, as we have seen (above, p. 20). It is also appropriate to speak of
linguistic ‘colonization’ or ‘conquest’. Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, French
and English all found new worlds into which to expand in this period.
As a result of conquest and immigration, these languages came to be
spoken in Asia, Africa and America. Portuguese, for instance, was spoken
in Goa, Ceylon, Macau, Mozambique, Angola and Brazil; Spanish in
Mexico, Peru and the Philippines; Dutch in Java, Sumatra, the Cape and
New Amsterdam; English in North America and India, and French in
Pondichery and Canada.82
The European rulers sometimes tried to impose their languages on the
indigenous inhabitants of their empires, at least on the local elites. In 1640,
the court or audiencia of Guatemala declared that only Indians who could
speak Spanish would be allowed to wear cloaks and ride horses. In his
commentary on the laws of the Indies, the Politica Indiana (1648), the
Spanish jurist Juan de Solorzano y Pereira explained the thinking behind
82 There is a substantial secondary literature on this theme, including Louis-Jean Calvet, Linguistique et
colonialisme (Paris, 1974); Angel Rosenblat, Los conquistadoresy su Lengua (Caracas, 1977); Jose Hon-
orio Rodrigues, ‘The Victory of the Portuguese Language in Colonial Brazil’, in Alfred Hower and
Richard A. Preto-Rodas (eds.), Empire in Transition (Gainsville, 1985), pp. 32-64; Victor Kiernan,
‘Languages and Conquerors’, in Peter Burke and Roy Porter (eds.). Language, Self and Society
(Cambridge, 1991), pp. 191-210; Walter D. Mignolo, ‘On the Colonization of Amerindian Lan¬
guages and Memories’, Comparative Studies in Society and History 34 (1992), pp. 301-30; Groeneboer,
Gateway, Diogo Ramada Curto, ‘A lingua e o imperio’, in Francisco Bethencourt and Kirti N. Chaud-
huri (eds.), Historia da expansaoportuguesa, vol. 1 (Lisbon, 1998), pp. 414-33; Palmer, Language and
## Conquest.

## 82
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
this policy, declaring that the conquerors impose their language ‘to show
in this the justification of their rule and the superiority (para mostrar en eso
el derecho de su dominioy superioridad)L}
In similar fashion, the Dutch East India Company, the VOC, tried to
impose Dutch in the East Indies. In 1641, an edict of the Governor-General
ruled that slaves were only allowed to wear hats or caps if they knew Dutch,
the idea being, apparently, to create a linguistic bond between colonizers and
colonized. The scheme seems to have failed. Again, in 1659, the Governor
of Colombo ordered slaves to learn Dutch.*4 More systematic and probably
more effective was the work of missionaries. Many missionaries learned the
languages of the regions they had come to convert, but they also taught
European languages, the vernaculars as well as Latin.
## WINNERS AND LOSERS IN EUROPE
To return to winners and losers in Europe. In 1600, it has been calculated,
French was in the lead with about fourteen million speakers, followed by
German with ten million, Italian with nine and a half million, Spanish with
eight and a half million, English with six million.*5
A number of smaller languages were in decline in the domain of speech as
well as that of writing. For instance, Scottish Gaelic was in retreat as English
advanced from the twelfth century. Welsh retreated more slowly, but the
gentry began to abandon it in the sixteenth century, just as they abandoned
their patronage of the bards. By the eighteenth century, the language was
disappearing from some regions, even if, thanks to population growth, the
absolute number of Welsh speakers was rising.S<1
On the other side of the Channel, Breton was in retreat as French
advanced from the thirteenth century onwards.s_ French was also expand¬
ing to the south. Occitan, which had already lost prestige after the defeat
of the heretics known as Cathars or Albigensians, was losing ground to
French in the fifteenth century, in both the administrative and the lit¬
erary domains. By the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, even spoken
83 Amos Megged, Exporting the Catholic Reformation: Local Religion in Early Colonial Mexico (Leiden,
1996), p. 65; Lucia Binotti, ‘La “lengua companera del imperio”: discursos peninsulares sobre la
hispanizacidn de America’, in A. Alonso Gonzilez et al. (eds.), Act as del III Congresso Intemacional
de historia de la lengua espahola (2 vols., Madrid, 1996), pp. 621—32, at p. 631.
84 Groeneboer, Gateway, pp. 28, 37-8, 51.
83 Otto Jespersen, Growth and Structure of the English Language (1905: revised ed., Leipzig, 1923).
86 Jenkins, Webh Language, pp. 78-81, 253, 290.
87 Elmar Ternes, The Breton Language’, in Donald Macaulay (ed.), The Celtic Languages (Cambridge,
1992), pp. 371—452., at pp. 372-5.

## 83
Vernaculars in competition
Occitan was receding.8S Basque, almost exclusively a spoken language, was
also retreating towards the Pyrenees between 1500 and 1800, although its
spread to the Americas via immigration should not be forgotten.89 Polish
advanced eastwards, at least in the domain of writing, after the union of
that country with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in 1569.
It would not always have been easy to predict which languages would
expand and which were condemned to contract. This point should become
clear from three examples of reversals of fortune, respectively from the
Germanic, Slavonic and Romance language groups. In each case, a language
that seemed to be on the rise around the year 1500 was overtaken by rivals
in the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The first example is that of Dutch. In the later sixteenth century, when
the seven provinces of the northern Netherlands became independent,
there were signs of a glorious future for the language. Stevin’s manifesto
in favour of the vernacular was published in 1582, a generation before the
praises of English and German by Carew and Opitz. The Nederduitsche
Poemata (1616) of Nicholaas Heinsius was an inspiration for the Teutsche
Poemata (1624) of Opitz. Dutch purism, in the sense of resistance to words
of foreign origin, was a model for German purism (below, p. 151). The
rise of the Dutch seaborne empire spread the language to Indonesia, South
Africa, North America and for a generation, to the northeast of Brazil as
well. Ail the same, in the course of the seventeenth century Dutch was
overtaken by its rivals German and English.
Like Dutch, Czech looked promising in 1500. Legal and administra¬
tive documents began to be written in that language in the 1370s. Czech
texts on grammar and orthography by Hus and others go back to the
early fifteenth century. The first printed book in Czech dates from 1468,
fifteen years before Croat and fifty-four years before Polish. The Bible,
together with works by Petrarch and Erasmus, was translated into Czech
relatively early, before it appeared in other Slavonic languages. The first
Czech grammar in print, by Benes Optat, dates from 1533, thirty-five years
before its Polish equivalent, by Peter Statorius. The Kralicy Bible (1579—
94) helped to shape the literary language, and some Polish writers, such
as Lukasz Gornicki, took Czech as a model. The first Czech dictionary,
Beneskovski’s Knizka slov ceskych, was published in 1587, seventeen years
88 Auguste Brun, Recherches historiques sur l’introduction du frangais dans les provinces du Midi (Paris,
1923); Brun, L ’introduction de la langue fran$aise en Bearn et en Roussillon (Paris, 1927); Bee, Langue
occitane-, Robert Lafont, Renaissance du Sudessai sur la litterature occitane au temps de Henri //(Paris,
## 1970).
89 Map in Banfi, Formazione, p. 486; on the Americas, Milhou, ‘politique’, pp. 21-2.

84 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
before the first English dictionary, Robert Cawdrey’s Table Alphabetical
## (1604).
In the later sixteenth century, however, from the time of the poet
Kochanowski onwards, Polish was coming to overtake Czech in the domains
of literature and print. There was increasing competition between German
and Czech. After 1620, when Bohemia was re-incorporated into the
Habsburg Empire, German became the language of administration. By
the 1740s, the number of hooks published in Czech had been reduced to ‘a
mere trickle’ to revive only at the end of the century.90
The third of these examples of reversal is that of Catalan.9' In 1500,
its future too looked promising. The literary tradition went back to the
fourteenth century, assisted by the fact that Catalan was close to Provencal,
one of the major literary languages of the Middle Ages. The first printed
book in Catalan appeared in 1474, about nine years before the first book
in Castilian. The Bible was published in Catalan in 1478, the Imitation
of Christ in 1491. However, after Ferdinand of Aragon married Isabella of
Castille, the court moved to Castille, followed by the Catalan aristocracy.
As the language of the court, Castilian acquired overtones of high status.
Another reason for the success of Castilian was that after 1492 it became
the language of a great empire. Indeed, ‘Castilian’ was becoming a less and
less appropriate name for the language, and from the time of the emperor
Charles V onwards, it was increasingly described as ‘Spanish’.92
Spanish was the language that Joan Bosca, a patrician of Barcelona, used
in his famous translation of Castiglione’s Courtier, thanks to which he
became famous as Juan Boscan. It was obviously appropriate for Boscan to
translate a book on the perfect courtier into the language of the court. Again,
Luis de Milan’s dialogue El Cortesano (1561), set in Valencia among the ladies
and gentlemen of the court of Queen Germana and her husband the duke
of Calabria, is written in Spanish except for a few passages representing
the speech of people who are not noble. On those occasions the dialogue
switches to Catalan, thus communicating a clear social message. The middle
class retained Catalan longer, but they too were switching to Castilian in
certain domains by the seventeenth century. Although the lawyer Jeroni
Pujades wrote the first part of his chronicle in Catalan in 1609, so he
explained, ‘in order not to be ungrateful to the fatherland and nation by
90 Robert Auty, ‘Czech’, in Alexander M. Schenkerand Edward Stankiewicz (eds.). The Slavic Literary
Languages: formation and Development (New Haven, 1980), pp. 163-82, at p. 172.
## 91 Garcia Carcel, Cataluna\ Marfany, Lengua.
92 Arnado Alonso, Castellano, espahol, idioma nacional: historia spiritual de tres nombres (Buenos Aires,
## 1938).

Vernaculars in competition 85
abandoning his own language for another’ (per no esser ingrat a la Patria
i nacio dexant la propia per altra llengua), he switched to Castilian for the
second and third parts of the text.93
In the domain of speech, Catalan was not under threat. Indeed, it was
claimed in 1621 that outside the main cities of Catalonia, ‘Castilian is not
well understood by ordinary people’ {no es ben entesa la llengua castellana
de la gent comuna).94 Hence, some bishops favoured sermons in Catalan,
public events that maintained the prestige of the language. All the same,
as we have seen, the Inquisition made the use of Castilian obligatory in its
trials in 1561, while in 1716 a secret instruction to regional administrators
told them to favour Castilian ‘in a subtle way’.95
Thus, in early modern Catalonia, language became a symbol of class
and the ability to speak and write Castilian became necessary to anyone
who aspired to rise socially, much like French in Provence or English in
Ireland. The gentry followed the model of the aristocracy, distinguishing
themselves from commoners by their use of the language of the court.96
This choice encouraged a sense of community among the Spanish nobility
as a whole and at the same time weakened the sense of a Catalan community,
increasing the social distance between the nobles and ordinary people.
Among the signs of the international success of certain languages was
their study in other countries. Italian was taught in some colleges and
universities in the sixteenth century, Spanish in the late sixteenth and early
seventeenth centuries, French from the late seventeenth century onwards
and English in the eighteenth century. For example, Italian was in use not
only at the court of the Italian Catherine de’ Medici in France but also
at that of Leopold I in late seventeenth-century Vienna. Leopold himself
corresponded in that language with Graf Humprecht Jan Cernin.97 Spanish
has also been described — with some exaggeration, but not much — as a
‘universal language’ in the seventeenth century, spoken at the courts of
Vienna, France, Brussels and Italy.98
## FRENCH AS A LINGUA FRANCA
The language whose speakers made the strongest bid for European hege¬
mony was of course French. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, as
93 Quoted in Garda Carcel, Cataluna, p. 87; cf. James S. Amelang, Honoured Citizens of Barcelona
(Princeton 1986), p. 190.
94 Quoted in Garcia Carcel, Cataluna, p. 86.
95 Josep M. Nadal, ‘El catak en els segles xvi i xvii’, L’Aveng 100 (1987), pp. 24-31.
96 Marfany, Lengua, pp. 239, 473.
97 Leopold I, Korrespondence, ed. Zdenek Kalista (Prague, 1936). 98 Pastor, Apologias, p. xxvii.

## 86
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
we have seen (p. 74), the use of French in the political domain was extended
to conquered provinces, where it was not the mother tongue."
Some people had grander ambitions for the language. Cardinal Richelieu,
who dominated French politics from 1631 to his death in 1643, was believed
to have a plan to make French the language of Europe.100 1 here was little
that even a statesman like Richelieu could do to turn this ideal into reality,
but a trend in this direction among certain groups is visible at about this
time.
For example, the regent class of the Dutch Republic often spoke among
themselves in French. In German courts, such as Stuttgart in the later sev¬
enteenth century, French was spoken, as it was later in Russia under Peter
and Catherine the Great.101 For eighteenth-century Germans with aspira¬
tions to status or civilization, French was the language of letter-writing.102
A funeral oration on Louis XIV noted that ‘aujourd’hui dans toutes les
cours, on parle la langue de ses sujets’.103
The idea that Louis XIV made Lrench the language of diplomacy
and international relations is an exaggeration, a ‘legend’ that makes too
much happen too quickly.104 At the congresses of Westphalia (1647-8) and
Nijmegen (1677-8), a good deal of Latin and some Italian and Spanish were
spoken.105 Ail the same, there was a more gradual trend in this direction.
Charpentier quoted a French diplomat at Nijmegen in 1678, the comte
d’Avaux, finding that in the houses of all the ambassadors, French was
‘used almost as much as their native language’ (presque aussi commune que
leur langue naturelle). In 1682, at Frankfurt, the French diplomats insisted
on using French although the imperial envoys expected to hear Latin.106
In 1714, the treaty of Rastatt was drawn up in French (perhaps because
the chief French negotiator did not know Latin), and this precedent was
followed in the treaties of Vienna (1735) and Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle)
in 1748.107
An important trend was the spread of French books outside France,
helped not only by the French contribution to the European Enlighten¬
ment but also, ironically enough, by the LIuguenot diaspora of the late
99 peyre, Royautr, Peter Sahlins, Boundaries: the Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees (Berkeley,
1989), pp. 116-19, 115—7.
100 James Howell, Ecclesiastical Affairs, vol. in (London, 1685), pp. 424-47.
101 Tim Blanning, The Culture of Power and the Power of Culture (Oxford, 2002), pp. 55-6.
101 Brunot, Languefranfaise, vol. v, pp. 360-2.
103 Edme Mongin, Oraison funebre de Louis le Grand (Paris, 1715), p. 14.
104 Brunot, Languefrantyaise, vol. v, p. 402.
105 Ibid., vol. v, pp. 295, 402-3. 106 Ibid., vol. v, pp. 411-17.
107 Ibid., vol. v, pp. 418—22; cf. Andr6 Corvisier, Arts et societes dans lEurope du i8e siecle (Paris, 1978),
p. 21.

Vernaculars in competition 87
seventeenth century. Both Louis XIV and the Protestants he expelled in
1685 would surely have been surprised to learn about this unintended con¬
sequence of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes. Some German writers
published books in French at this time, including Leibniz, Frederick the
Great and a number of minor writers of the eighteenth century.108
In the earlier seventeenth century, the scholar-magistrate Peiresc’s
attempt to use French in his correspondence with the imperial librarian
in Vienna had met with a rebuff.109 By 1685, on the other hand, the refugee
scholar Pierre Bayle’s claim that French was a ‘langue . . . transcendantelle’,
the language of communication between ‘tous les peuples de l'Europe’ was
becoming a reality, assisted by the publication - outside France - of news¬
papers in French, such as the Gazette de Leyde, which lasted from 1677 to
## 1811.110
Learned periodicals in French, whether produced in France or the Dutch
Republic, were being read all over Europe, the Nouvelles de la Republique
des Lettres, for instance, the Bibliotheque Universelle et Historique (1686—
93), and its successors the Bibliotheque Choisie (1703-13), the Bibliotheque
Ancienne etModerne (1714—27) and so on, published in Amsterdam, and the
Nouveau Journal des Savants (1696), published in Berlin.111 When Frederick
the Great ordered that the language of the Berlin Academy of Sciences be
changed from Latin to French in 1744, he was recognizing a trend rather
than imposing his personal preference.
There was, inevitably, resistance to the rise of French. In his Wiles
Lectures, delivered over twenty years ago, Michael Roberts told the story
of Johan III of Sweden, ‘who once rebuked the impertinence of a king
who wrote to him in French by answering him in Finnish’.112 Johan’s
Francophobe successors ranged from the Viennese librarian mentioned
above to the imperial envoys at Frankfurt and to Dr Samuel Johnson, who
insisted on speaking Latin to his French visitors. Treaties in Latin continued
to be drawn up in the eighteenth century.113
All the same, by the eighteenth century the French could reasonably
think of their language as potentially universal, the successor of Latin, as
108 Brunot, Languefranfaise, vol. v, pp. 381-5.
109 Peter Miller, Peiresc’s Europe (New Haven, 2000), p. 163.
110 Quoted in Paul Hazard, The European Mind, 1680-iyis (1935: English translation, London, 1953),
p. 61.
111 jean Sgard (ed.), Dictionnaire des journaux, 1600—1789 (2 vols., Paris, 1976).
112 Roberts, Imperial Experience, p. 21. Cf. Nils Ahnlund, Svenskt och Nordiskt (Stockholm, 1943), p. 114,
where Johan responds to a letter from Philip II in Spanish. A similar story is told about Roberts
himself during his time in Belfast, receiving a letter in Gaelic from Dublin and replying in Swedish.
113 Ahnlund, Svenskt, pp. 114-22.

88 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Anglophones think of their language - or languages - today. In 1782, the
Berlin Academy could propose as the subject for a prize essay, ‘Qu’est-ce
qui a fait la langue fran^aise la langue universelle de l’Europe?’ The prize was
shared between two candidates, Johann-Christoph Schwab, who wrote his
essay in German, and Antoine Rivarol, whose Universalite de la langue
frangaise contained the famous phrase, ‘ce qui n’est pas clair n’est pas
fran9ais’.114
The simultaneous expansion of a number of European vernaculars into
an increasing number of linguistic domains led to more contacts between
them. The contacts led in turn to mixing. Linguistic encounters and mix¬
tures are the subject of the following chapter.
114 Antoine Rivarol, De I’universalite de la langue fran(aise (1784: ed. T. Suran, Paris, 1930), p. 255.

## CHAPTER 4
Standardizing languages
The more the domain of the vernaculars, at least some vernaculars,
expanded, the more necessary it was for those vernaculars to be standard¬
ized. ‘Standardization’ is an ambiguous term that refers not only to the pro¬
cess of becoming more uniform (uniformidad, Nebrija called it) but also to
following rules. The purpose of standardization in this period was also dou¬
ble. It was partly pragmatic, to facilitate communication between regions,
and partly honorific, to give Italian, or Spanish, or German, or English
some of the prestige or dignity associated with Latin. When Du Bellay,
for example, wrote about the illustration of the French language, he was
discussing how to make it illustrious, on the model of the volgare illustre rec¬
ommended by Dante. His wish was to elevate French (elever nostre vulgaire)
to the level of more famous languages. The Spanish humanist Cristobal de
Villalon explained that he wrote his grammar to make his nation great
(■engrandecer las cosas de mi nacion).
A language without a standard was regarded as ‘in a manner barbarous’,
as the poet John Dryden remarked in 1660. Civilization implied following a
code of behaviour, including linguistic behaviour. The sociologist Norbert
Elias’s idea of a ‘civilizing process’ in early modern Europe might therefore
be extended to include attempts to reform language.1 Using the approved
or standard variety of language was, for many speakers at least, a form of
self-control, since what came ‘naturally’ (or at least habitually) to them was
another variety, such as dialect.
Another purpose of standardization, besides uniformity across space, was
fixity over time. For a language to gain the kind of prestige accorded to
Latin, it had to be stable. For this reason, Dryden found it embarrassing
that while ‘from the time of Boccaccio and of Petrarch, the Italian has varied
1 Norbert Elias, The Civilizing Process (1939: English translation, 2 vols., Oxford, 1981-2). There are
some perceptive remarks on language in vol. 1, pp. n, 108—13, but no explicit link is made between
language and the civilizing process itself.
## 89

90 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
very little’, in the English case, on the other hand, Chaucer ‘is not to be
understood without the help of an old dictionary’. Jonathan Swift disliked
what he called ‘the perpetual variations of our speech’ and hoped ‘to fix it
for ever’.2 We might call this reaction ‘the anxiety of instability’. On the
other side of the Atlantic, Hugh Jones, a professor at William and Mary
College, expressed the wish in 1721 ‘that a public standard were fix’d’. As
the journalist Antoine de Rivarol wrote at the end of our period, ‘fixity is
necessary’ (ilfaut de la fixite).3
The desire for fixity was one important reason for the foundation of
academies in Florence (the Crusca, 1582), Paris (1635), Madrid (1713),
Copenhagen (1742), Lisbon (1779), Moscow (1783) and Stockholm (1786),
all of them responsible for dictionaries (although the Portuguese did not
get beyond the letter A). The motto of the Spanish academy was (and is)
‘it purifies, it fixes and it gives splendour’ {limpia, fija y da esplendor).
Many grammars of European vernaculars were published in this period,
often written in Latin to facilitate their use by foreigners learning the lan¬
guage, but also intended to propose rules to native speakers. By 1550 there
were printed grammars of Italian, Spanish, French, Portuguese, German
and Czech. Between 1550 and 1599, additions to the list included Dutch,
English, Polish, Welsh, Slovene and Church Slavonic. Between 1600 and
1649, Basque, Croat, Danish, modern Greek (called ‘popular Greek), and
Latvian. Between 1650 and 1699, Breton, Estonian, Frisian, Lithuanian,
Russian, Sorb and Swedish. Between 1700 and 1749, Albanian, Romansh
and Sami. In 1757, Romanian.
The publication of a grammar of a given vernacular does not of course
mean that even a minority of the speakers of that vernacular were actually
following the rules. All the same, the spread of the grammars is impressive
and, in the case of a few vernaculars, the rules appear to have been taken
seriously by elites.
It might be said that certain vernaculars won the battle with Latin by
ceasing to be vernaculars, by creating a sort of‘authorized version’ of lan¬
guage that was distant from colloquial speech. The question, which variety
of vernacular ought to be authorized, whether for writing, or for conversa¬
tion among cultivated people, was much debated in early modern Europe.
2 Hermann M. Flasdieck, Der Gedanke einer englischen Sprachakademie (Jena, 1928), pp. 39, 71.
3 Villaldn quoted in Amado Alonso, Castellano, espanol, idioma national: historia spiritual de tres nombres
(Buenos Aires, 1938F P- 34> Jones quoted in Allen W. Read, American Projects for an Academy to
Regulate Speech’, Publications of the Modern Language Association 51 (1936), pp. 1141—79, at p. 1141;
Rivarol quoted in Alexis Francois, Lagrammaire dupurisme et l Academic Fran(aise au t8esiecle (Paris,
1905), p. 14.

Standardizing languages 91
The competition discussed in the previous chapter recurs here at another
level.
In the course of the Renaissance, the humanists, following their usual
procedures of imitation and emulation, mainly of Latin and sometimes of
Greek, attempted to reform a number of vernaculars (including Italian,
Spanish, French, Portuguese and English) in order to make them more
suitable for literary use. The movement of reform spread still more widely in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Writers in one country were often
inspired to emulate what was going on elsewhere. For example, Du Bellay
borrowed from the dialogue on the vernacular by Speroni, the supporters
of the literary use of Welsh were aware of Italian and French precedents,
while the Spanish Academy and the Russian reformer Vasily Trediakovsky
were both inspired by the French critic Vaugelas.4
The trend to ‘grammatization’, as it is sometimes called, looks - at least
at first sight — like a remarkable example of the power of scholars and
intellectuals, but it might be more realistic to offer a social explanation for
their success. Standard forms of vernacular were expressions of the values of
new communities - or communities of increasing importance - the national
communities of lay elites who were distancing themselves not only from
learned or Latin culture but from popular, regional or dialect culture as well.
In any case, there was in this period a collective, co-operative Euro¬
pean enterprise aimed at raising the status of the vernaculars, codifying
them, enriching them and so turning them into languages appropriate for
literature. This enterprise was greatly assisted by a new medium of com¬
munication, print.
## THE ROLE OF PRINT
Some historians of printing regard the fixity or standardization of language
as a virtually automatic outcome of the mass production of identical texts
from Johann Gutenberg onwards. As Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin
put it in their classic study of the rise of the book, printing played an essen¬
tial role in the formation and fixing of languages’. Sigfrid Steinberg agreed:
‘Having fortified the “language walls” between one nation and another’,
he wrote, ‘the printers proceeded to break down the minor differences of
speech . . . within any given language group’.5
4 R. Brinley Jones, The Old British Tongue: the Vernacular in Wales, 1540-1640 (Cardiff, 1970), pp. 12-13.
s Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin, The Coming of the Book (1958: English translation, London,
1976), pp. 319-32, at p. 319; Sigfrid H. Steinberg, Five Hundred Years of Printing (1955: revised ed.,
Harmondsworth, 1961), p. 88; cf. Michael Giesecke, Der Buchdruck in derfiiihen Neuzeit (Frankfurt,
1991), pp. 489-97-

## 92
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
There is a good deal to be said in favour of this view. It is clear that a
standard language suited the economic logic of the printing industry, the
need to sell identical texts to the maximum number of readers. The shift
from the variety of spellings of the same word in the late Middle Ages,
for instance, to the uniform standards of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries is a dramatic one. Similar points can be made about regional
variations in vocabulary. The idea that the spread of printed books influ¬
enced writing habits - and, later, speaking habits - seems an inherently
plausible one.
One of the most convincing examples comes from outside Europe. It is
the role of missionaries, especially Jesuits, in fixing indigenous languages
such as Nahuatl in Mexico, Quechua and Aymara in Peru, Tupi in Brazil,
Tagalog in the Philippines and so on, by writing these languages down for
the first time as well as compiling dictionaries and writing grammars such
as Alonso de Molina’s Nahuatl-Spanish vocabulary (1555), Diego Gonzalez
Holguin’s dictionary of Quechua (1586), Jose de Anchieta’s grammar of
Tupi (1595), or Ludovico Bertonio’s dictionary of Aymara (1612). In these
regions there was a shift from orality to print without passing through an
age of manuscript.
All the same, we cannot assume that the press was the only actor in
this drama. Four general observations should serve to make the story more
complicated.
- The first point is a conceptual one. The concept of ‘standardization is
less simple than it looks, and it is necessary to distinguish official varieties
of language from those with most prestige and those most widely under¬
stood.6 The formal codification of a language is not the same thing as the
rise to dominance of a particular dialect or sociolect. Standardization of
practice, whether in writing or speech, is a matter of degree and to this
day German, for instance, is less standardized than English or French.
- The second point is a chronological one. The process of standardization is
older than the printing-press. In the case of some European vernaculars,
it began long before 1450. In England, for example, West Saxon was
widespread in the eleventh century as a literary language. Scholars debate
the question whether this ‘Standard Old English’ was the work of King
Alfred or the bishop of Winchester, Aethelwold.7 In Spain, the process
6 John E. Joseph, Eloquence and Power: the Rise ofLanguage Standards and Standard Languages (Oxford,
1987), p. vii.
7 Helmut Gneuss, ‘ I he Origin of Standard Old English’, Anglo-Saxon England 1 (1972), pp. 63—83;
John H. Fisher, ihe Emergence of Standard English (Lexington, 1996), p. 75. My thanks to Simon
Keynes for drawing my attention to this debate.

Standardizing languages 93
becomes visible in the thirteenth century.8 In Bohemia, Jan Hus reformed
Czech orthography in the early fifteenth century. More generally, as
Febvre and Martin were well aware, the chanceries of Europe played
an important part in the history of the vernaculars from the fourteenth
century onwards. In the German-speaking world, written norms were
influenced by the practice of the chanceries of Prague, Vienna, and later
Meissen in Saxony. In England, a chancery standard began to spread
from the year 1417 onwards.9
In the third place, print was a two-edged weapon that could be used
to promote rival standards. In the case of Britain, it is relatively easy
to forget this point, since for much of this period presses were virtually
confined to London. The result of this quasi-monopoly was to spread
the hegemony of south-eastern English not only to the north and west
of England, but to the Lowlands of Scotland as well, leading to what has
been called 'the sudden and total eclipse of Scots as a literary language’
around the year 1500.10 In France too, despite the importance of Lyons
during the Renaissance, a high proportion of books came to be published
in Paris.
However, the story is very different in the German-, Spanish- or
Italian-speaking worlds, where printing was polycentric. In Spain, the
arrival of the press in Valencia, Seville, Salamanca, Barcelona and else¬
where led, so we are told, as much to ‘chaos’ as to ‘general uniformity’.11 In
Germany, the period before 1550 has been described as one of competing
‘printer’s languages’ (Druckersprachen) in Augsburg, Frankfurt, Leipzig,
Basel, Wittenberg and elsewhere.12 Books printed in sixteenth-century
Venice, Milan, Florence, Rome and other cities also promoted different
varieties of language. It was only in the early seventeenth century that
Tuscan forms became the typographical standard.13 In the German- and
Roger Wright, ‘Linguistic Standardization in the Middle Ages in the Iberian Peninsula: Advantages
and Disadvantages’, in Stewart Gregory and David A. Trotter (eds.), De mot en mot (Cardiff, 1997),
pp. 261-75.
Malcolm Richardson, 'Henry V, the English Chancery and Chancery English’, Speculum 55 (1980),
pp. 726-50; John H. Fisher, ‘European Chanceries and the Rise of Standard Languages’ (1986: repr.
in Emergence), pp. 65-83.
J. Derrick McClure, ‘English in Scotland’, Cambridge History of the English Language vol. v
(Cambridge, 1994), pp. 23-93, at P- 36.
Wright, ‘Standardization’, p. 272.
John Waterman, A History of the German Language with Special Reference to the Cultural and Social
Forces that Shaped the Standard Literary Language (Seattle, 1966), p. 128.
Pietro Trifone, ‘La lingua e la stampa nel ’500’, Storia della Lingua Italiana, vol. 1 (Turin, 1993),
pp. 425-46, at p. 441; Paolo Trovato, Con ogni diligenza corretto: la stampa e le revisioni editoriali dei
testi letterari italiani, 1470-1770 (Bologna, 1991); Brian Richardson, Print Culture in Renaissance Italy:
the Editor and the Vernacular Text, 1470-1600 (Cambridge, 1994).

## 94
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Italian-speaking worlds in particular, the sense of regional community
remained strong, and encouraged an attachment to dialect that extended
to the upper classes.
France may have lacked such regional variations but it was not exempt
from deviations from the standard. Even the famous Dictionary of the
Academie Frangaise (1694), which was supposed to set orthographic stan¬
dards, spelled the same words differently on different pages according to
the compositor employed.'4
- In the fourth place, there is the problem of agency. The defenders of the
thesis of a ‘print revolution’ have stressed the medium of communication
at the expense of the messages of those writers, printers and readers who
used the new technology for their own purposes.15 On the other hand,
the critics of the ‘revolution’ thesis view print as a technology that may
be employed by different individuals or groups for different purposes in
different locales.
The determinism implicit in the ‘revolutionary’ position and the vol¬
untarism of some critics are equally one-sided. It is surely more illu¬
minating to speak, like the Canadian media theorist Harold Innis, of a
built-in ‘bias’ to be found in each medium of communication.'6 In other
words, print may be viewed as a catalyst, assisting changes rather than
initiating them, and requiring certain cultural or social preconditions in
order to succeed. Although print has its economic logic, derived from
the need to sell a uniform product in as large a market as possible, it
is always possible for printers and their patrons to defy that logic, until
funds run out.
Returning to the first of these four problems, the conceptual one, the
following pages will distinguish codification and unification, discussing the
two trends in order.
## CODIFICATION
There were many codifiers or would-be codifiers active in this period,
although they often disagreed about the standard to be adopted. Here, as
elsewhere in this study, it may be useful to adopt a comparative approach.
The ‘language question’, la questione della lingua as Italian scholars call
it, was a European debate, not just an Italian one, although it was more
14 Nina Catach, Histoire de (orthographic frangaise (Paris, 2001), p. 175.
15 Elizabeth Eisenstein, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change, 2 vols. (Cambridge, 1979).
'6 Harold Innis, The Mas of Communications (Toronto, 1951).

Standardizing languages 95
intense in some places than others. It was, for instance, relatively muted in
## Spain.17
In the course of the Renaissance a number of humanists and other writers,
caught between their admiration of Latin and their ambitions for their own
vernacular, dreamed of making the later more dignified by discovering or
inventing its rules. They began to publish grammars of the vernacular
modelled on the rules for Latin and Greek.
The first of these was the Gramatica castellana written by Antonio Nebrija
and published in 1492, the first printed grammar in a vernacular language
(a grammar of Italian had been written in the 1430s by the humanist
Leonbattista Alberti, but it was not published until 1495). Alberti’s Regole
della lingua fiorentina was followed by the Regole grammaticali della vol-
gar lingua (1516), by Gianfrancesco Fortunio, and by the book destined
to have the greatest success, the Prose della volgar lingua (1525) by Pietro
## Bembo.
Grammars of other languages soon followed. The importance of the
1530s, a decade before the rise of treatises in praise of the vernacular
(above, p. 65) is worth noting. Publications included a French grammar
by the physician Jacques Dubois (1531), a Czech grammar by Benes Optat
and his collaborators (1533), a German grammar by the Protestant pastor
Valentin Ickelsamer (1534), a grammar of Portuguese by the Dominican
friar Fernao de Oliveira (1536) and a Hungarian grammar by Janos Sylvester
## (i539)-
Thirty-five grammars of French had appeared in print by the year 1600,
while grammars of ninety-eight languages, European and extra-European,
had been published by 1782.18
## ORTHOGRAPHY AND PUNCTUATION
It was especially of the written language that many rule-givers were thinking.
One of their principal concerns was to codify spelling and punctuation.
Treatises on Czech and Polish orthography go back to the early fif¬
teenth century. In the case of Italian, French, Spanish and English, on
17 Luciana Stegagno Picchio, ‘La questione della lingua in Portogallo’, in Joao Barros, Didlogo (1540:
newed., Modena, 1959), pp. 5-54; Riccardo Picchio (ed.), Studi sulla questione della linguapresso gli
slavi (Rome, 1972); Picchio, ‘Guidelines for a Comparative Study of the Language Question among
the Slavs’, in Picchio and Goldblatt, Aspects, vol. 1, pp. 1-42.
18 John H. Rowe, ‘Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century Grammars’, in Dell Hymes (ed.), Studies in
the History of Linguistics (Bloomington, 1974), pp. 361-79, at p. 361.

96 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
the other hand, the standard was debated most vigorously in the sixteenth
century.19
In Italy, for instance, the debate began in the 1520s, launched by the
humanist Gian Giorgio Trissino, who had strong ideas about the reform of
spelling. In Spain, the controversy was spread out over a longer period.
Nebrija’s rules of orthography were published in 1517, while Gonzalo
Correas, a professor of Greek at the University of Salamanca, proposed
reforms rather like Trissino’s in his Ortografia kastellana (1630). In France,
the great debate took place around 1550, the year in which Jacques Peletier
published a dialogue on orthography and Louis Meigret his Trettede lagram-
maire frangoeze (the spelling of the title gives some sense of the reforms he
proposed). In England, John Hart’s Ortbographie was published in 1569 and
William Bullokar’s Amendment of Orthography in 1580. Among the would-
be reformers of English spelling in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
were the writers Gabriel Harvey, James Howell and John Evelyn.10
The Germans, the Dutch and the Portuguese also debated these questions
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. A treatise on Danish spelling
was published in 1678, while Peter the Great personally reformed Russian
orthography at the beginning of the eighteenth century (the tsar’s correc¬
tions of a draft scheme have survived).
The principal aim of the reformers was uniformity. They tried to ensure
that every sound was rendered in writing in just one way. With the model
of ancient Greek in mind, they suggested the introduction of new letters
{omega into Italian, kappa into Spanish, theta into English and so on), the
abolition of traditional letters (removing q or y from English, for instance),
the suppression of silent letters (such as the final g in ‘ung’ in French),
and the adoption of accents (such as the grave, acute and circumflex).The
French borrowed the cedilla from Spanish at this time.11
Many of the reforms were unsuccessful. Spaniards, for instance, do not
call their language ‘Kastellano’, as Correa wished. On the other hand, the
acute, grave and circumflex accents did become part of everyday writing
practice in a number of languages. At much the same time, signs for punc¬
tuation were introduced into Italian, thus simplifying the task of reading
19 Ferdinand Brunot, Langue frangaise, vol. n, pp. 93-123; Richard F. Jones, The Triumph of the English
Language (Stanford, 1953), pp. 142-67; Nina Catach, L 'orthographic frangaise H Pepoque de la Renais¬
sance (Geneva, 1968); Brian Richardson, 'La riforma ortografica dal 1501 al 1533’, in Mirko Tavoni
(ed.), Italia e I'.uropa (Ferrara, 1996), pp. 257-66; Vivian Salmon, ‘Orthography and Punctuation’,
in Lass, History of the English Language, vol. in, pp. 13-55.
20 Flasdieck, Gedanke, pp. 9, 23,31.
11 Malcolm B. Parkes, Pause and Effect: an Introduction to the History of Punctuation in the West
(Aldershot, 1992).

Standardizing languages
## 97
aloud. I he printer Aldo Manuzio introduced the apostrophe, borrowing
it from ancient Greece, while his son Paolo Manuzio introduced the semi¬
colon. These signs soon spread to French and other languages. Spelling
became more uniform - though not completely so - in one language after
another, with Spanish and Italian in the lead and the sixteenth century as
the crucial period.22
A second debate concerned linguistic unification and the comparative
merits of different varieties of the vernacular. This debate had two main
outcomes. On one side, we see the victory of one dialect over its rivals, as in
the cases of Spain, Italy, France and England, and on the other the triumph
of a mixed variety or koine.
## THE VICTORY OF A DIALECT
In Spain, the spread of a standard form of Castilian was linked to the
Reconquest. The variety spoken in Burgos became the standard, accepted in
Toledo when that old capital was retaken from the Muslims or ‘Moors’ and
then spreading southwards. In 1235, King Alfonso X, ‘the Wise’, declared
Toledo to be ‘the measure of the Spanish language’ (metro de la lengua
castellana) A further stage in standardization was reached around 1500,
in the age of the joint monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella and also of the
humanist Antonio Nebrija, although Nebrija’s grammar was criticized by a
fellow-humanist, Juan de Valdes, for its Andalusianisms.24 As a result, early
modern Castille was unusually homogeneous from the linguistic point of
view. There were no dialects.25
In the Italian case, many voices were heard in this debate, including
that of Machiavelli, while the solutions proposed ranged from a mixed
or common language associated with the court (lingua commune, lingua
cortigiana) to the spoken language of Florence or Tuscany. In the victory of
the Tuscan norm, it appears to have been the literary achievement of Dante,
Petrarch and Boccaccio, without parallel in other regions of Italy, which
weighed most heavily in the balance, thanks in particular to the efforts of
## Pietro Bembo.
22 Attilio Bartoli Langeli, La scrittura dell’italiano (Bologna, 2000), pp. 8, 77-104.
23 Wright, ‘Standardization’. Cf. Hans-Josef Niederehe, Die Sprachauffassung Alfons des Weisen
(Tubingen, 1975), pp. 98-100.
24 Ramon Menendez Pidal, ‘La lengua en tiempo de los Reyes Catdlicos’, Cuadernos Hispanoamericanos
13 (1950), pp. 9-24; Juan de Valdes, Didlogo de la lengua (written c. 1536: ed. Juan M. Lope Blanch,
Madrid, 1969), p. 46.
25 Alain Milhou, ‘politiques’, in Langues et cultures, pp. 15-40, at p. 18.

## 98
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Bembo was a Venetian patrician, a humanist and finally a cardinal. He
was still better known as a literary pope or arbiter of good style in both
Latin and Italian. In Latin, he was a Ciceronian. In the case of Italian, it was
Bembo who canonized Petrarch and Boccaccio, presenting them as models
for anyone who wished to write and speak with elegance and purity (below,
p. 145), thus ending what he called the ‘Babel’ of competing varieties of
vernacular.26 From the regional point of view, Bembo was something of
an oddity. A Venetian living in Rome, the variety of language that he
promoted was Tuscan. This looks like one of many cases of an outsider’s
over-identification with a norm, although it should be noted that the Luscan
standard advocated by Bembo was that of the fourteenth century.2
The literary achievement of Dante, Petrarch and Boccaccio might be
exploited for political reasons, and was so exploited by Cosimo de’Medici,
Grand Duke of Tuscany, who used this ‘cultural capital to legitimate his
regime, sending an ambassador to the Council of Trent to prevent the ban¬
ning of Boccaccio’s Decameron as well as founding an academy in Florence
concerned with questions of language.28 All the same, the appeal of Tuscan
was cultural rather than political or religious in origin.29 The religious route
to standardization was closed in the middle of the sixteenth century, when
vernacular Bibles were banned.
The price of the cultural route to the standard, lacking the support of
either the state or the Church, was that it was only taken by a tiny minority
of the population, living mainly in Tuscany and in Rome - although the
upper classes elsewhere might employ the Tuscan standard to mark special
occasions, and the eighteenth-century Neapolitan elite used it more gen¬
erally. Hence, the eighteenth-century Lombard writer Carlo Gozzi called
Italian a ‘dead language’, like Latin. It has been calculated that when Italy
became a single nation in i860, only 2.5 per cent of the population knew
and used the standard language.30
In France and England, on the other hand, the victory of the dialects of
the lie de France and the Home Counties seems to have been the result of
a mixture of urbanization and political centralization.
26 Robert A. Hall, Jr, The Italian questione della lingua (Chapel Hill, 1942); Maurizio Vitale, La questione
della lingua (i960: revised ed. Palermo, 1984); Brian Richardson, 'Gli italiani e il toscano parlato nel
’500’, Lingua Nostra 48 (1987), pp. 97-107.
27 Carlo Dionisotti, Gli urnanisti e il volgare fra quattro- e cinquecento (Florence, 1968).
zK Sergio Bertelli, ‘Egemonia linguistica come egemonia culturalc’, Bibliothequed'Humarusmeet Renais¬
sance 38 (1976), pp. 249-81.
29 It has been argued that Tuscan won thanks to Florentine banks: Fisher, 'Chanceries’, p. 80.
30 Tullio De Mauro, Storia linguistica dell'Italia unita (1963: revised ed., Rome, 1991), pp. 14, 43, 78.

Standardizing languages
## 99
Already in the sixteenth century the humanist Benedetto Varchi, like
Bembo an authority on language, recognized that ‘the language of Paris’
(la lingua parigina) could not be described as barbarous. The seventeenth-
century poet Francois de Malherbe might be described as a new Bembo.
Like Bembo, he was an outsider, who came not from Paris but from the
South. Malherbe wanted, as he put it, to ‘degasconize’ French, to lay down
rules for language, as well as for poetry. As in the case of Bembo, his ideals
were institutionalized. Bembo’s work was carried on by the Accademia
della Crusca, and Malherbe’s by the Academie Fran^aise, founded by
Cardinal Richelieu on the Florentine model. Some of the early members
of the Academie were followers of Malherbe, and one of the tasks of the
institution was to reform the language, excluding from polite usage not
only regionalisms but also foreign words and the technical terms used by
artisans.31
The successful varieties of French were those of la couretla ville, as people
said in the seventeenth century, the court and the capital, or as Claude de
Vaugelas, another member of the Academie Fran^aise, put it, ‘the sound¬
est part of the court’ (la plus saine partie de la cour), including women
and those townspeople who were in contact with the court and so ‘partic¬
ipate in its culture’ (participent a sa politesse). The ‘remarks’ of Vaugelas,
as he called them, proved controversial, and the years around the middle
of the seventeenth century were the height of the French questione della
lingua, but the standard he proposed was effectively adopted.32
As a model speech community, the term ‘court’ should be understood
in a wide sense, including not only the noblemen and women surrounding
the king but the clerks in the chancery as well. Chancery language was
not infrequently taken as a model for writing by private individuals. In the
case of German, for instance, the imperial chanceries at Prague and Vienna
and the Saxon chancery at Meissen had most prestige (below, p. ioi). In
England, ‘chancery English’ was spreading in the mid-fifteenth century. A
hundred years later, the printer Robert Estienne claimed in his grammar -
written and published in Geneva in 1557 - that the chancery was one of
the places where the best French could be heard. As late as 1599 a book was
published called Le tresor du stile de la Chancellerie, suggesting that the style
of the royal officials remained a model for good writing.
31 Brunot, Langue pan^aise, vol. ill (1909), pp. 3-9.
32 Claude de Vaugelas, Remarques sur la langue pan^aise (Paris, 1647), preface: Erich Auerbach, ‘La
cour et la ville’ (1951: English translation in his Scenes pom the Drama of European Literature, New
York, 1959, pp. 133-79); Wendy Ayres-Bennett, Vaugelas and the Development of the French Language
(London, 1987).

ioo Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
By the seventeenth century, on the other hand, the key locales were the
royal court and the salons of some noble ladies in Paris, notably that of
Madame de Rambouillet, frequented by both Malherbe and Vaugelas. It is
tempting to conclude that despite their bad press (above, p. 35) theprecieuses
may well have had the last word. Although they wrote little and published
even less on the subject, the role of aristocratic women in the purification
of language should not be underestimated. As sociolinguists have often
pointed out, women in many societies are more polite than men, as well as
displaying a tendency to hypercorrectness.33
England had no Bembo and no academy, although Daniel Defoe, among
others, called for one ‘to polish and refine the English tongue’. The Royal
Society set up a committee ‘for improving the English language’ in the
later seventeenth century and the Society’s first historian, 7 homas Sprat,
also supported an English language academy on the model of the Academie
Fran^aise.34 In the eighteenth century, Dr Johnson’s Dictionary was not only
a work ol reference but also a deliberate attempt ‘to refine our language’.
All the same, social change probably had more effect on the language
than the efforts of any individual. The growth of London and the fact
that the court was located nearby encouraged the adoption of the south¬
eastern dialect as the standard, first in the chancery and then more generally.
The Elizabethan writer George Puttenham advised poets to follow ‘the
usual speech of the court and that of ‘London and the shires lying about
London within 60 miles’. It has been calculated that between 1650 and
1750 one adult in six had experience of London life. Migration to the
capital is likely to have been of great assistance to the process of linguistic
unification.35
In other countries too, a standard was advocated based on the speech of
the court or the capital. The Polish writer Jan Seklucjan supported what he
called ‘courtly language’ (dworski mowy). Henrik Gerner wrote in favour of a
standard Danish based on the usage of Copenhagen. Mikhaylo Lomonosov
suggested that the dialect of Moscow be taken as the Russian standard, not
only as the language of the court but also ‘on account ol the importance of
the capital’.36 Turning to practice, Rome, the headquarters of the Catholic
Church, acted as a kind of capital for early modern Italy, and helped to
spread the Tuscan standard.
33 Janet Holmes, Women, Men and Politeness (London, 1995). 34 Flasdieck, Gedanke, pp. 30-7.
35 George Puttenham, The Arte of English Poesie (1588: ed. Gladys D. Willcock and Alice Walker,
Cambridge, 1936), p. 145; E. Anthony Wrigley, ‘A Simple Model of Londons Importance, 1650—
1750’, Past and Present 37 (1967), pp. 44-70.
36 Antoine Martel, Michel Lomonosov et la langue litteraire russe (Paris, 1933), pp. 36-7.

## IOI
Standardizing languages
## THE RISE OF THE KOINE
In Italy, which lacked a capital in this period, the phrase ‘courtly lan¬
guage’ (lingua cortigiana) referred to a koine or common language (other¬
wise known as a lingua commune) that combined elements from different
dialects. This solution to the language problem was proposed by various
participants in the debate, but proved unable to compete with the Tuscan
standard.
On the other hand, in German, and also in Swedish, Dutch and Finnish,
we see the victory of the mixed solution. In the Dutch case, this mixture
may have been the result of urbanization, especially the rapid growth of
Amsterdam in the seventeenth century, due in part to immigration from
Antwerp. Irritating to traditional Amsterdammers at the time, as Bredero’s
satire suggests (above, p. 39) in the long run the language of the immigrants
made an important contribution to standard Dutch.
The most famous and best-studied case of the creation of an early modern
koine is that of German.37 The difference between the dialects of North
and South (Hamburg and Munich, for instance), or East and West (Leipzig
and Cologne, say) was so great as to present formidable obstacles to inter¬
regional communication, written as well as spoken. When the imperial
chancery and those of some leading princes adopted the vernacular in the
fourteenth century, they had to decide what form of vernacular to choose.
After the chancery of the emperor, based first in Prague and later in Vienna,
that of the elector of Saxony at Meissen had most prestige. Eastern Germany
was relatively unified linguistically because it had been colonized relatively
recently, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
All the same, the language of the Saxon chancery incorporated elements
from other forms of German in order to be more widely intelligible - after
all, the purpose of a chancery was to send letters to other places.38 We might
refer to this process of incorporation as ‘pragmatic standardization’. It led
to the creation of what was known at the time as a ‘common language’
(,lingua communis).
37 John Waterman, German Language, pp. 128-35; Erwin Arndt and Gisela Brandt, Luther und die
deutsche Sprache (1983: second ed., Leipzig, 1987); Max L. Baeumer, ‘Luther and the Rise of the
German Literary Language: a Critical Reassessment’, in Scaglione (ed.), Emergence, pp. 95-117; G.
Arthur Padley, ‘Germany: Luther and the Dialects’, in his Grammatical Theory in Western Europe
1500—1700, vol. 11 (Cambridge, 1988), pp. 244-318.
38 William F. Twaddell, ‘Standard German’, Anthropological Linguistics 1, no. 3 (1959), pp. 1-7, at p. 2;
Gerhard Kettmann, Die kursdchische Kanzleisprache zwischen i486 und 1546 (Berlin, 1967); cf. Fisher,
## Emergence.

102 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In his attempt to reach ordinary people with his message, Martin Luther
decided to write in the vernacular (though he also wrote in Latin for fellow-
scholars). He was a Saxon but he did not want to limit his audience to
Saxony. He could not write in German, for a standard German did not
exist at this time. As he once remarked, ‘Germany has so many dialects
that people living only thirty miles apart do not understand one another’
(Germania tot habet dialectos, ut in triginta miliaribus homines se mutuo non
intelligant) ,39
Luther’s solution to this problem was to follow the model of his local
chancery. ‘I speak in the style of the Saxon chancery’, he once declared
(Ich red nach der sechsischen cantzeley).4° The emphasis on speaking rather
than writing is worth noting. Luther believed that people do not learn
languages from books as well as ‘orally, at home, in the marketplace and
from preaching’ (aus der mundlichen rede, im Clause, auffdem marckt und
in derpredigt). In practice, Luther used expressions from his own dialect in
writing as well as in speech, but he gradually followed the chancery model
more closely. To speak more exactly, he followed different chancery models,
imperial as well as Saxon.41
It was once again for pragmatic reasons that the Diet of Upper Lusatia set
up a committee in 1691 to ensure that a standard language was employed in
Protestant texts written in Sorbian. For similar reasons to the Protestants,
in their attempt to reach as many people as possible with their religious
message, the Jesuits in Bohemia adopted a kind of koine, midway between
Czech and Slovak. Associated with the Jesuit University ofTrnava between
1635 and :777> this language became known as ‘Jesuit Slovak’ (jezuitska
slovencina). It was the equivalent of the so-called ‘general languages’ (linguas
gerais, lenguasgenerates) based on Tupl, Quechua and other Indian languages
that the Jesuit missionaries used in Brazil and Peru.
In the struggle for the souls of ordinary people, the Protestants had
a major advantage over the Jesuits and other Catholic missionaries: the
vernacular Bible.
## THE LANGUAGE OF THE BIBLE
The Danish scholar Peter Skautrup has spoken of ‘the Reformation of
language’ (Sprogets reformation).42 The Reformation was associated at one
level with centrifugal forces, with what might be called the breakup of the
v> Martin Luther, Iisch-Rcden, 5 vols. (Weimar, 1912), no. 6146.
40 Luther, Tisch-Reden, no. 1040. 41 Baeumer, ‘Luther’, pp. 100-3.
42 Skautrup, Danske sprog, vol. 11, pp. 175-203.

Standardizing languages
## 103
Roman ecclesiastical empire, but at another level it was associated with
centripetal forces, with the creation of national vernaculars as opposed to
regional dialects.
The logic of missions was like the logic of print. To reach as many
people as possible, it was necessary to speak and write in a language that
the maximum number of listeners or readers could understand. Hence,
Luther had recourse to the koine of the Saxon chancery not only in his
sermons but also in the translation of the Bible that he published between
1522 and 1534.
It should be emphasized that this koine was only a regional standard,
current in central and eastern Germany. Luther’s Bible was not intelli¬
gible all over the German-speaking world, as the printer Georg Erlinger
of Bamberg, among others, realized. Erlinger added a glossary to his edi¬
tion of the Luther version of the Epistles and Gospels ‘because I have
observed that not everyone can understand some words’ (weil ich gemer-
ckt hab daz not yederman verston mag etliche worter).43 In the north they
understood still less, so Luther’s translation had to be retranslated into Low
## German.
Despite these problems, the Luther Bible became a linguistic model.
A German grammar, published in Latin by Johannes Clavius in 1578,
declared on the title-page that its examples would be taken ‘from the Luther
Bibles’ (ex bibliis Lutheri). Conversely, the Catholic Church’s opposition
to the translation of the Bible was a major obstacle to the success of a
rival solution supported by Luther’s opponent Johann Eck, a standard
based on Swabian.44
Elsewhere in Europe, translations of the Bible, often made by commit¬
tees of scholars, also played a crucial part in the creation of a koine. Take
Scandinavia, for instance.45 In Sweden, King Gustav Vasa’s Bible (1541)
followed the Luther model and used a language that could be understood
all over Sweden, although a majority on the committee of translators came
from Uppsala or Stockholm. In Denmark, the committee was asked by the
king to follow the example of Luther, and so Christiern Ill’s Bible (1550),
as it was called, provided a written norm for Danish that later became a
spoken norm.46
43 Karl Schottenloher, Die Buchdruckertatigkeit Georg Erlingers in Bamberg (Leipzig, 1907).
44 Werner Besch et al. (eds.), Sprachgeschichte: Ein Handbuch zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und
ihre Erforschung (Berlin, 1984).
45 Lillemor Santesson, ‘Ecclesiastical History III: Luther’s Reformation’, in Oskar Bandle (ed.), The
Nordic Languages, vol. 1 (Berlin, 2002), pp. 412-24.
46 Elias Wessen, ‘Studier over sprSket i Gustav Vasas Bibel’, Nysvenska studier 7 (1927), pp. 251-63;
Skautrup, Danske sprog, pp. 210-6.

104 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In Finland, the story is a little more complicated. Mikael Agricola, the
Lutheran bishop of Turku, who had studied in Wittenberg, translated
the New Testament (1548) and part of the Old, basing himself on the
dialect of the Turku area and also introducing new words into Finnish. His
text has been described as ‘a sort of pot-pourri of dialects’. However, in
1642, the Bible was re-translated by a committee headed by Eskil Petraeus
that aimed at writing in a language that could be understood all over the
country.47
Turning to Dutch or Flemish, we find a similar situation. Jan Utenhove’s
New Testament aimed, we are told, at ‘a Dutch text that would be compre¬
hensible to readers from all parts of the Netherlands’.48 It was not successful,
so the work was done again in the Calvinist ‘States’ Bible’ (Statenbijbet) of
1637, commissioned by the States-General. This translation was, like the
English Authorized Version, the work of a committee, but a committee in
which different regions and their dialects were represented.49
The influence of the scriptures on the standardization of vernacular writ¬
ing and even speech is also perceptible in Czech, Danish, English, Hungar¬
ian and other languages. The story does not begin with the Reformation.
John Wyclif’s earlier contribution to the development of English, like that
of Jan Hus to Czech, was an important one. A Catalan Bible was printed as
early as 1478 and a Czech Bible in 1488. However, the Bible played a more
important part in the history of the European vernaculars after 1520.
The English part of this story is well-known, from the New Testament
of William Tindale (1525-6) to the Authorized Version (1611). Tindale, for
instance, enriched the language with words such as ‘Passover’ and ‘scape¬
goat’, and phrases such as ‘broken-hearted’, ‘peace-maker’ and ‘stumbling-
block’.50 The Authorized Version contributed ‘clear as crystal', ‘fat of the
land’, ‘root of all evil’, ‘still small voice’ and proverbs such as ‘the wages of
sin is death’ and ‘sufficient to the day is the evil thereof’.
However, translations of the Bible were also important in the history of
many other vernaculars, including Icelandic, in which the New Testament
appeared in 1540, Romansh, in which it came out in 1560, and Basque, in
47 Haugen, Scandinavian Languages; Aur£lien Sauvageot, L 'elaboration de la languefinnoise (Paris, 1973);
Sauvageot, ‘Le finnois de Finlande’, in Istvan Fodor and Claude Hagege (eds.), Language Reform,
vol. in (Hamburg, 1984), pp. 173-90, at p. 179.
Andrew Pettegree, Emden and the Dutch Revolt (Oxford, 1992), p. 90.
49 Cornells G. N. de Vooys, Geschiedenis van de Nederlandse taal (1931: fifth ed., Antwerp and Gronin¬
gen, 1952.), pp. 108-10. Robert B. Howell, ‘ Fhe Low Countries’, in Stephen Barbour and Cathy
Carmichael (eds), Language and Nationalism in Europe (Oxford, 2000), pp. 130-50, at p. 143, doubts
the influence of this Bible on the language.
50 Gavin I). Bone, ‘Tindale and the English Language’, in Stanley L. Greenslade, The Work of William
Tindale (London, 1938), pp. 50—68.

Standardizing languages 105
which it was published in 1571 (the work of a French Calvinist missionary).
It was in the context of translations of the Bible that a controversy broke
out in Poland in the 1540s about the best model for the literary language,
whether it should come closer to Czech or remain pure Polish.
The influence of the Geneva Bible of 1588 on the spoken French of
Protestants at least is suggested by the seventeenth-century phrase describ¬
ing their speech as ‘the patois of Canaan’ (a variant of the biblical phrase
lingua Canaan, Isaiah 19.18). In Bohemia, literary Czech was shaped by the
Kralicy Bible (1579—93), leading to the development of what was known in
the eighteenth century as ‘Bible language’ {biblictind). In Wales, Morgan’s
Bible (1588) has been described as the basis of modern literary Welsh. The
Hungarian Protestant Bible of 1590 was important for the development of
literary Hungarian.
Bible translations were one of the principal means by which printers
aided the process of linguistic standardization, to which some of them
were committed. For example, the printer Gaspar Heltai contributed to
the standardization of Hungarian orthography by the books he produced
in the later sixteenth century. As in the cases of Bembo, Malherbe and
Vaugelas, we see the importance of the outsider, since Caspar Helth, as he
was originally known, was a German who only learned Hungarian at the
age of twenty.
The story of the Bible in Illyria, the lands of the South Slavs, is an
unusually complex one. In the mid-sixteenth century Primoz Trubar, a
Protestant exile in Germany, worked on a Bible translation into Slovene
while his assistants worked on Croat. The Italian Protestant humanist Pier
Paolo Vergerio suggested translating the Bible into a language that could be
understood by all South Slavs, but Trubar considered this task to be impossi¬
ble. By 1561, however, Trubar was concerned to publish books which Croats,
Dalmatians, Serbs, Bosnians and even Bulgarians could all understand, a
popular and Protestant version of Church Slavonic. The New Testament
translated by Antun Dalmatin and Stjepan Konzul (printed 1562-3), drew
on Croatian, Istrian and Dalmatian dialects.51
In the case of Sorb, or, as it was known at the time, ‘Wend’, we find a polit¬
ical assembly intervening in the language question, in a manner reminis¬
cent of nineteenth-century Norway. The Estates of Lusatia was concerned
with the variety of translations of religious literature from German and so
51 Martin Dimnik, ‘Gutenberg, Humanism, the Reformation and the Emergence of the Slovene Liter¬
ary Language 1550-1584’, Canadian Slavonic Papers 26 (1984), pp. 141-59, at p. 154; Dimnik, ‘Primoz
Trubar and the Mission to the South Slavs (1555-64)’, Slavonic and East European Review 66 (1988),
pp. 380-99. at pp. 389. 392-

io6 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
supported what they called ‘the new Sorbian style' (dem neuen wendiscben
Stylo).52 In the case of Romanian, the metropolitan of Transylvania, Simeon
Stefan, argued in 1648 (in the preface to a translation of the New Testa¬
ment) in favour of a common literary form of the language. However, it
would take centuries for such a form to be established. Similarly, in the case
of Czech, Slovak, Slovene, Serbian, Croat, Bulgarian and Greek, the age
of linguistic standardization was the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries, the age of Josef Dobrovsky, L’udovit Stur, Jernej Kopitar, Vuk
Stefanovic Karadzic, Ljudevit Gaj and Adamantios Korais.
## THE ROLE OF THE PRINTERS
In some discussions of the importance of print, the printers themselves
are almost invisible, ‘unsung heroes’, squeezed out between the famous
writers on one side and impersonal forces on the other.'1 However, in
many parts of Europe we find individual printers playing leading roles in
the standardization of the vernacular.
In late fifteenth-century England, for instance, William Caxton decided
to print in chancery English and so encouraged its wider use, although he
was not consistent in the spellings he favoured.54 In the German-speaking
world, Sebastian Franck was a printer who was personally involved in the
language question, like his colleagues Hieronymus Wietor and Jan Malecki
in Poland. In Paris and Geneva, Geoffroy Tory, Etienne Dolet and Robert
and Henri Estienne were all at work as reformers of language as well as
printers.55 In the Slav world, the Ruthenian Pamva Berynda was at once
a monk, a printer and the compiler of a dictionary. In sixteenth-century
Hungary, a key role was played by Caspar Heltai, as we have seen. Since
only a few Hungarian presses were in operation, the efforts of an individual
like Heltai could have a disproportionate effect.
The success of Tuscan was also aided by print - once the printers were
persuaded to adopt Tuscan norms - while certain printers, notably Aldo
Manuzio, Bembo’s printer, and his son Paolo Manuzio, were involved in
the movement of codification. The edition of Dante published by Aldo in
1501 illustrates the process. The spelling of the manuscript Aldo used and
,z Alfred Mietzschke, ‘Der Entstehung der obersorbischen Schriftsprache (1668-1728)’, Zeitschrift fur
Slavische Philologie 28 (i960), pp. 122-48, at p. 135.
53 Richard Cole, ‘Reformation Printers: Unsung Heroes’, Sixteenth-Century Journal 15 (1984),
## PP- 32.7—39-
54 John H. Fisher, ‘Caxton and Chancery English’ (1984: repr. Fisher, Emergence), pp. 121-44; Thomas
Cable, ‘ I he Rise of Written Standard English’, in Scaglione, Emergence, pp. 75-94, at pp. 81—3.
55 Catach, Orthographic, pp. 31-50, 51-70, 245-59.

Standardizing languages
## 107
the published version of Dante differ in a systematic way, showing that
Aldo wanted to make Italian look more like Latin. Hence anno, ‘they have’,
became hanno, giusticia becamzgiustitia, silencio became silentio, and scuola
became schola (in all but the last case, modern Italian follows Aldo).56
In three further cases, one of them Spanish, one German and one English,
the happy survival of a manuscript, along with the text printed from it,
allows us to enter the printer’s workshop and observe the decisions taken
there. The Gran Conquista de Ultramar, a thirteenth-century Spanish trans¬
lation of a twelfth-century Latin chronicle, was published in 1503. A com¬
parison with the manuscript has shown that variations in orthography and
syntax have been eliminated, and also that the choices adopted have often
survived into the Spanish of today: calle rather than call, dignidad rather
than dignitat, imperio rather than emperio, etc.57
In the German-speaking world, the different printer’s languages’ of the
early sixteenth century yielded to the norms of Wittenberg and Frankfurt
after 1550.58 The survival of a manuscript printed by Sigmund Feyerabend
of Frankfurt allows a comparison of the same kind as the Gran Conquista.
Ulrich Schmidl’s account of his adventures in the New World was written
in Bavarian dialect, and it was also highly inconsistent in spelling and
grammar. The version published in 1567 not only modified the Bavarianisms
but also made the verbal forms more consistent, and again, on occasions,
closer to the modern German: from warden to warten, for instance, pleibt
to bleiben, friedt to Fried,59 Feyerabend also printed Luther’s translation of
the Bible, but in his editions the language was modified to make it less
## Saxon.60
An English example of the same process is that of John Harington’s
translation of Ariosto, published in 1591. Yet again the changes made the
printed version closer to modern English, changing bee to be, for instance,
greef to grief noorse to nurse and swoord to sword.61
As Ferdinand Brunot once argued, the printers had more influence on
the way that French was written than Malherbe or Vaugelas.62 In the case of
England and France, the organization of printing, itself a reflection of the
56 Ambroise Firmin-Didot, Aide Manuce et IHellenisme a Venise (Paris, 1875), P- !95-
57 Ray Harris-Northall, ‘Printed Books and Linguistic Standardization in Spain’, Romance Philology 50
## (1996), PP- 123-46.
58 Waterman, German Language, p. 128.
59 Marion L. Huffines, ‘Sixteenth-Century Printers and the Standardization of New High German’,
Journal of English and Germanic Philology 73 (1974), pp. 60-72.
60 Baeumer, ‘Luther’, p. 115.
61 Fernand Mossd, Esquisse d’une histoire de la langue anglaise (Lyon, 1947), p. 140.
62 Brunot, Langue fran^aise, vol. iv, p. 119; Henri-Jean Martin, Print, Power and People in Seventeenth-
Century France (1969: English translation, Metuchen, NJ, and London, 1993).

108 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
centralization of government, assisted the process of linguistic unification.
In England, printing was centralized — indeed, it was virtually confined to
London, Oxford and Cambridge until the eighteenth century. In France,
as in England, the capital city dominated the printing industry, and the
supremacy of Paris was strengthened by government intervention in the
age of Louis XIV.
## THE SPOKEN LANGUAGE
A second wave of standardization affected the spoken language. Its chronol¬
ogy is more difficult to establish, but it seems that the common practice of
reading aloud contributed in the long term to bringing the spoken language
closer to the written.
In sixteenth-century Italy and seventeenth-century France, in particular,
language debates were concerned with the speech of educated people as
well as with the written language. Indeed, Malherbe and Vaugelas were
more concerned with speech than with writing. The debates extended to
pronunciation as well as vocabulary. Renaissance writers on pronunciation
were mainly concerned with Latin and Greek, but Jacques Peletier and
Theodore Beza discussed French, John Rhys Italian, and Juan Lopez de
## Velasco Spanish.
In England, where accent was already a social shibboleth, as we have
seen (above, p. 41), Robert Robinson’s The Art of Pronunciation (1617) was
an early contribution to the debate, but the mid-eighteenth century was
probably the turning-point, as the success of the works on correct speech
by Thomas Sheridan bear witness. William Johnston’s Pronouncing and
Spelling Dictionary (1764) offers further evidence of the increasing concern
with speaking correctly. So does John Walker’s Critical Pronouncing Dictio¬
nary (1791), which made the famous claim that London pronunciation was
‘the best’ because it was ‘more generally received’ than its rivals.
In some parts of Europe, from the Dutch Republic through the German
states to Russia, the use of French by the upper classes probably delayed the
rise of a standardized vernacular, since it was less necessary for distinguishing
between people of high and low status. In Denmark, German performed
a similar function. All the same, a concern for the spoken vernacular was
developing, and a Danish grammarian wrote in 1679 that ‘our corrupt
speech should adapt itself to our cultivated writing in order that we may
also get a cultivated speech’. 3
Henrich Gerner, quoted in Haugen, Scandinavian Languages, p. 418.

Standardizing languages
## 109
## CENTRIPETAL VERSUS CENTRIFUGAL
The power of centrifugal forces must not be underestimated. Mikhail
Bakhtin has written eloquently about the long history of competition
between standard or official languages and their unofficial alternatives, such
as dialects and jargons, part of the rivalry or indeed the conflict between
official culture and popular culture.64 Such conflict is endemic, and it
would doubtless be a disaster for both varieties of language if it did come to
an end.
Two hundred years after Luther, in the middle of the eighteenth century,
Frederick the Great, writing in French, could still dismiss German as an
unrefined language, ‘semi-barbaric and divided into as many dialects as
Germany has provinces’. In the eighteenth century, the language debate
was still raging among German men of letters. Johann Christoph Adelung,
for instance, supported a south Saxon standard, some Bavarians proposed
their own dialect, Joachim Campe favoured a koine, while Johann Christoph
Gottsched advocated a written standard based on the usage of Meissen in
Saxony.65 To this day, German is a less unified language than, say, English
or French.
In short, the story of standardization was subject to considerable varia¬
tion in different parts of Europe. In Italy and Germany, in particular, there
was resistance, the centrifugal tendencies being as strong as or stronger
than the centripetal ones.66 In Eastern Europe, the great age of standard¬
ization was the nineteenth century (below, p. 168). Where standardization
was successful in the early modern period, it took different routes. In the
case of France, scholars have spoken of‘linguistic absolutism’, noting the
involvement of the state with the official arbiter of language, the Academie
Franchise (imitated in Spain, Russia and Sweden). In England, on the other
hand, we see the rise of a standard by informal means.
Returning to the question raised at the beginning of the chapter, we
may now say that standardization owed something to conscious planning
but that the unification of national languages owed more to forces outside
human control, including the medium of print and the rise of certain courts
and cities. The rise of a codified language, praised at the time as refined,
64 Mikhail Bakhtin, ‘From the Prehistory of Novelisdc Discourse’ (1975: English translation, The
Dialogic Imagination, Austin, 1981), pp. 41-83.
65 Eric A. Blackall, The Emergence of German as a Literary Language, ijoo-ys (Cambridge, 1959).
66 W. Theodor Elwert, Studidi letteratura veneziana (Venice-Rome, 1958); Luca Serianni, ‘La lingua del
Seicento: espansione del modello unitario, resistenze ed esperimenti centrifughi’, in Enrico Malato
(ed.), Storia della letteratura italiana, vol. v (Rome, 1997), pp. 561-96.

iio Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
urbane or polite’, should surely be viewed as part of the ‘civilizing pro¬
cess’ which Norbert Elias described and linked to state-building in France
and elsewhere. The warrior nobility were gradually tamed and turned into
courtiers. They lost their local accent and their local loyalties at about the
same time.
As in the case of table manners, to which Elias devoted particular atten¬
tion, the glamour ol the court and its influence on provincial elites encour¬
aged the adoption of the new form of language, which became a sign that
its users were distinct from and superior to ordinary people. The reform
of speech was part of a wider change, the withdrawal from participation in
many forms of popular culture on the part of European elites. Culture was
becoming more important as a status symbol at a time when older social
hierarchies were breaking down, especially in large cities such as London or
Paris. In the anonymity of such cities, status was coming to depend less on
birth and more on the ‘culture of politeness’, which included speaking the
right variety of language as well as wearing the right clothes.67 As Vaugelas
remarked in the preface to his Remarques, one wrong word was sufficient
for someone to lose face in good company (pourfaire mespriser unepersonne
dans une compagnie).
As the supporters of different vernaculars liked to point out, their lan¬
guages deserved praise because they were rich, abundant or copious. More
exactly, they were becoming richer by borrowing words, whether from Latin
or from other vernaculars. The languages of Europe were becoming more
mixed. The process of mixing is the subject of the following chapter.
67 Elias, Civilizing Process; Peter Burke, Popular Culture in Early Modem Europe (1978: second ed.,
Aldershot, 1994), pp. 270-80; Lawrence E. Klein, Shaftesbury and the Culture of Politeness (Cambridge,
## 1994)-

## CHAPTER 5
Mixing languages
Chapter 3 referred to ‘winners’ and ‘losers’ in the competition. However,
in the history of language, as in the case of history in general, this contrast
should not be made too sharp. The losers sometimes influence the winners
to some extent, producing some kind of mixture, whether this is conscious
or unconscious, pragmatic (as in the case of a lingua franca) or playful, as
in the case of macaronic literature.
This process of linguistic exchange, as well as expressing the increasing
cultural unification of Europe, contributed to its ‘Europeanization’, or at
least offered some compensation for the gradual decline of communication
in Latin. The participation of the elites of different European countries in
a common culture that extended from music to warfare was marked by the
creation of what the nineteenth-century Italian poet Giacomo Leopardi
called ‘europeisms’ (europeismi).1 All the same, historians of Europe have
so far had little to say about this aspect of cultural encounters, preferring
to leave this topic to their colleagues the linguists. Inspired by some recent
work on ‘language encounters’ in North America in particular, I have tried
in what follows to extend the approach to Europe.2
When there are contacts between speech communities, the influences
flow in both directions and the result is cultural ‘hybridization’ or ‘trans-
culturation’.3 In the case of language, the process of hybridization produces
pidgins, creoles and other mixed languages. Pidgins may be described as
languages without native speakers, languages that have been simplified,
pruned to the minimum in order to allow people from different speech
communities to understand one another. Creoles are pidgins that have
grown back, in other words acquired native speakers and become com¬
plex again. Some linguists also refer to ‘mixed languages’, which combine
1 Tullio De Mauro, Storia linguistica dell’Italia unita (1963: new ed., Rome-Bari, 1991), pp. 9, 283.
2 Edward G. Gray and Norman Fiering (eds.), The Language Encounter in the Americas, 1492-1800
(New York, 2000).
3 Fernando Ortiz, Cuban Counterpoint (1940: English translation, New York, 1947).
## Ill

in Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
the vocabulary of one language with the syntax of another, like the media
lengua of Ecuador, which is Spanish in lexicon but follows Quechua rules
of syntax.4
The process of globalization is contributing to language mixing today,
most visibly — or audibly - in the invasion of so many languages, from
Portuguese to Japanese, by English or Anglo-American words and phrases.
However, the mixing of languages at global level began centuries ago. In
early modern times it was a consequence of the invasion of the rest of the
world by Europeans, otherwise known as ‘discovery’ or ‘empire-building’.
Portuguese was the first to expand its domain, followed by Spanish, French,
Dutch and English.5
Similar processes of hybridization had been taking place within Europe
for a long time. In medieval England, for example, English, French and
Latin were in constant interaction, and the borrowing of Scandinavian
words was so important that some linguists speak of ‘pidginization’ and
‘creolization’ in Middle English. However, this chapter will argue that bor¬
rowing and mixing increased in the early modern period. A language spoken
by relatively few people, Maltese for example, reveals the mixing process
more clearly than a language spoken by millions. In the later fifteenth
century, Maltese was essentially a dialect of Arabic. By the late eighteenth
century, on the other hand, it bore many traces of Sicilian, Catalan, French
and north Italian.6
I here were at least two main reasons for an increase in language mixing at
this period. In the first place, mixing was encouraged by migration, includ¬
ing the three great diasporas of the period. The Greeks left the Byzantine
Empire for Italy around 1453, the Ladino-speaking Jews left Spain for Italy
and the Netherlands around 1492, and the French Protestants left France for
London, Amsterdam or Berlin around 1685. Migration was also a response
to the religious wars of the period 1568-1648. The religious refugees who fled
to Poland in the sixteenth century and brought their languages with them
included speakers of Italian, French, Flemish and Hungarian. Thanks to
the immigration in the later sixteenth century of Protestants fleeing perse¬
cution, ‘Norwich was a trilingual city for perhaps as much as two hundred
4 Alexandria Rosetti, ‘Langue mixte et melange de langues’, Acta linguistica 5 (1945), pp. 73—9, dis¬
tinguishing ‘langue mixte’ front ‘langue melangee’; cf. Antonio Quilis, ‘Le sort de l’espagnol au
Philippines: un probl£me de langues en contact’, Revue Linguistique Romane 44 (1980), pp, 82-107;
Bakker and Mous, Mixed Languages.
5 Richard W. Bailey, Images of English: a Cultural History of the Language (Ann Arbor, 1991), p. 60.
6 Geoffrey Hull, ‘Maltese, front Arabic Dialect to European Language’, in Fodor and Hagege, Language
Reform, vol. vi, pp. 331-46.

Mixing languages 113
years’, in which nearly 40 per cent of the inhabitants spoke French or
Flemish as their first language.7
In the second place, the gradual decline of Latin was making it necessary
for more Europeans to study one another’s vernaculars than before. There
was also a rise of translations from one vernacular into another from the
sixteenth century onwards. An unintended consequence of the processes
of learning and translation was mixing. Linguists have pointed out that
whenever a person regularly speaks or writes two languages, some kind of
'interference’ is virtually bound to occur.8
Two figures, one fictional and one real, preside over this chapter. The
fictional character is Salvatore, a character in Umberto Eco’s The Name
of the Rose, who is described by a colleague as ‘the monk who looks like
an animal and speaks the language of Babel’, which turns out to be a
mix of Latin, French, Italian, Provencal and Spanish. The real person is
the Russian Mikhail Bakhtin, who was fascinated by what he variously
called — in Russian, of course — ‘polyglossia’, ‘polyphony’ or ‘heteroglossia’,
the dialogue between different languages or varieties of language, including
what he called their ‘interanimation’, the idea being that mixing encourages
language consciousness and so linguistic and literary creativity.9
## LANGUAGE LEARNING
A number of early modern rulers, ministers and diplomats are known to
have spoken several European languages. William the Silent, for instance,
who governed the Netherlands during the struggle for independence from
Spain, knew French, Dutch, German and Spanish. The emperor Leopold
knew Latin, Italian and Spanish as well as his native German. Erik xiv of
Sweden is said to have known five foreign languages - German, Italian,
Spanish, French and Finnish.10
Like their masters, ambassadors knew languages better than most. John
Hackett, Henry viii’s ambassador in the Low Countries, is said to have spo¬
ken six languages, English, Latin, French, Spanish, Flemish and Italian).11
In the reign of Louis xiv, when French was becoming the common language
7 Peter Trudgill, ‘Third-Person Singular Zero’ (1997: repr. Jacek Fisiak and Peter Trudgill (eds.), East
Anglian English (Cambridge, 2001), pp. 179-86, at p. 183.
8 Max Weinreich, History of the Yiddish Language (1973: English translation, Chicago, 1980).
9 Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and his World (1965: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1968), pp. 81-
2; Bakhtin, ‘From the Prehistory of Novelistic Discourse’ (1975: English translation, The Dialogic
Imagination, Austin, 1981), pp. 41-83, p. 81.
10 Michael Roberts, The Early Vasas: a History of Sweden, 1523-1611 (Cambridge, 1968), p. 199.
11 Joycelyne G. Russell, Diplomats at Work (Stroud, 1992), p. 125.

04 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
of diplomacy, Francois de Calibres recommended entrants to this profes¬
sion to learn Italian, Spanish and German - though not English — as well
as Latin.12 In Denmark, the three Ulfeldt brothers, leading members of
the political elite, were said by a French visitor to have spoken six or seven
languages and to have understood still more.'3
Some scholars and men of letters also achieved a respectable score.
The botanist Charles de l’Ecluse (Clusius) knew Dutch, German, Italian,
Spanish and French. The Hungarian poet Balint Balassa was said to have
known as many as nine languages, including Turkish and three languages
from the Slavonic family.
It has been argued that an interest in learning modern foreign languages
was on the increase in a number of European countries in this period, for
example in France and Spain (despite the local traditions of xenophobia)
between 1650 and 1700.14 It was certainly becoming easier to study these
languages, thanks to the rise of a number of institutions.
One key institution, in the broad sense of that term, was the Grand
Tour, on the course of which many young aristocrats learned Italian and
French. The Tour has been studied most carefully in the case of England,
although French, Dutch, German, Polish and Scandinavian aristocrats fol¬
lowed similar routes in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. It was
generally, though not always, a case of the northern Europeans exploring
the south. The Tour made the knowledge of foreign languages necessary
and at the same time offered a convenient means of learning them.
Foreign languages were also taught in some European schools, colleges
and universities. In towns in the Netherlands, for instance, both boys and
girls were not infrequently taught French.15 Spanish was often taught in
France in the seventeenth century, and Dutch sometimes, at the College
de Guyenne, for instance, perhaps on the principle that it is necessary
to understand one’s enemies. German was also taught in France at this
time.16 In London, the way to learn foreign languages was to go to a private
tutor, like the French-speaking Protestant refugees established near St Paul’s
11 Francis de Calibres, De La maniere de negocier avec les souverains (Paris, 1716).
'3 Peter Skautrup, Danske sprog, vol. 11, p. 305.
14 Henri-Jean Martin, Print, Power and People in 17th-Century France (1969: English translation,
Mctichen, NJ, and London 1993), p. 544; Asensio Gutierrez, La France et lesfranfais dans la litterature
espagnole: un aspect de la xenophobic en Espagne 1598-166$ (St-Etienne, 1977), pp. 129-45.
15 Kornelis J. Riemens, Esquisse historique de I’enseignement du franfais en Hollande du t6e au 19c siecle
(Leiden, 1919).
16 Sabina Collet Sedola, ‘L’dtude de l’espagnol en France a Pdpoque d’Anne d’Autriche’, in Charles
Mazouet (ed.), L age d'or de I'influence espagnole: hi France et FEspagne it lepoque d’Anne d'Autriche
(Mont-de-Marsan, 1991); Paul L6vy, La langue allemande en France, vol. 1, Des origines a 1830 (Lyon,
1950); on Dutch, see pp. 93-5, 126-31.

Mixing languages 115
Churchyard.1" In similar fashion in Danzig (now Gdansk), French schools
were opened by French refugees in the seventeenth century.
In Oxford and Cambridge, language teaching, mainly of Italian, Span¬
ish and French, was informal, with private tutors operating outside the
university system.18 In some continental colleges for nobles, on the other
hand, modern languages were part of the curriculum. This was the case
at the Collegium Illustre at Tubingen in the late sixteenth century, for
instance, and at the Danish noble academy at Soro in the early seventeenth
century.19 Gradually the teaching of modern languages infiltrated the uni¬
versities. Italian was taught at the University of Halle in the seventeenth
century, and the romance languages at Ingolstadt and Leipzig. French was
taught at the University of Uppsala from 1637, and at the University of
Lund from 1669.20
Hundreds of grammars and dictionaries were produced in this period to
allow speakers of one language to learn another. A few of them were mul¬
tilingual, notably ‘Calepino’, a dictionary first published in 1502, regularly
reprinted until late in the eighteenth century, and gradually enlarged so
that it finally included eleven languages.
## THE CASE OF ENGLISH
Readers, especially anglophone readers, may have been surprised by the lack
of reference to English in the preceding section. The point is that learning
English was not a high priority for continental Europeans at this time, at
least not until the eighteenth century. An Italian treatise on diplomacy,
Ottaviano Maggi’s De legato (1596), declared that an ambassador should
know seven languages - Latin, Greek, Italian, French, Spanish, German and
Turkish - but not English. As a distinguished historian of the Renaissance
has commented, ‘Nobody in the sixteenth century except an Englishman
was expected to speak English, not even the perfect ambassador’. The main
exception was that of the Netherlanders, north and south, who learned
English for commercial reasons.21
17 Kathleen Lambley, The Teaching and Cultivation of the French Language in England during Tudor
and Stuart Times (Manchester and London, 1920).
18 Mark H. Curtis, Oxford and Cambridge in Transition, 1558-1642 (Oxford, 1959), pp. 137-41.
19 Hans Helmut Christmann, ‘Italienische Sprache in Deutschland’, in Konrad Schroder (ed.), Fremd-
sprachenunterricht 1500-1800 (Wiesbaden, 1992), pp. 43-56.
20 Elisabet Hammar, L 'enseignement du frangais en Suede jusqu 'en 1807 (Stockholm, 1980).
21 Garrett Mattingly, Renaissance Diplomacy (London, 1955), p. 217; Petrus L. M. Loonen, For to Learne
to Buye and Sell: Learning English in the Low Dutch Area between 1500 and 1800 (Amsterdam-Maarssen,
## 1991).

ii6 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
The regret expressed by the French scholar Nicolas Fabri de Peiresc in
a letter ol 1628, that the accounts of travel edited by Samuel Purchas were
unintelligible to him, expressed a common situation among continental
scholars. Even in the early eighteenth century, when The Spectator was
being read almost all over Europe, we find the German-Swiss writer Johann
Bodmer and his friends studying the periodical in French translation.22
One reason that relatively few books were translated from English into
other European languages before the middle of the seventeenth century
was the lack of people with sufficient knowledge of the language. The few
translators often had special reasons for acquiring English. T he French
noblewoman Genevieve Chappelain, for example, the translator of Philip
Sidney’s Arcadia, spent time at the English court in the suite of the Countess
of Salisbury. Pierre de Mareuil, a Jesuit who translated Milton, had an
unusual and unwelcome opportunity to learn English — in captivity.
Other examples of foreigners who mastered English before the year
1700 include the Swedish Princess Cecilia and the Transylvanian noble¬
man Miklos Bethlen, who records in his autobiography the fact that he
studied English in the Netherlands for five to six weeks in preparation for
a visit to England in 1663.23 Ail the same, the continental men of letters
who could read English were so rare, at least before 1700 or so, that they
can virtually be listed in a paragraph.
Italians included the historian Giovanni Francesco Biondi, who lived in
London and wrote on the Wars of the Roses, and the natural philosopher
Lorenzo Magalotti, who visited England and made, but did not publish, a
translation of the poems of Edmund Waller. The Dutch scholar Constantijn
Fiuygens studied English on a visit to England in 1618 in the suite of an
embassy, and learned it well enough to translate nineteen poems by John
Donne.24 In the case of Germany, the poet Georg Weckherlin knew English
even before settling in that country in 1619, while the polymath Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz, to judge from the books he ordered, had at least a reading
knowledge of the language.
The situation began to change from the late seventeenth century
onwards. References to the teaching of English now multiply, from the
academy for diplomats founded in Paris in 1712, through the German
22 Eric A. Blackall, The Emergence of German its a Literary Language, 1700-7$ (Cambridge, 1959), p. 69.
23 Istvln (1. T6th, Literacy and Written Culture in Early Modern Europe (1996: English translation,
Budapest, 2000), p. 136.
24 Rosalie L. Colic, Some Thankfulness to Constantine: a Study of English Influence upon the Early Works
of Constantijn Huygens (The Hague, 1956), pp. 52-71.

Mixing languages 117
colleges for noblemen to the University of Gottingen, which appointed
a certain John Tompson professor of English in 1732.25 Among the
eighteenth-century German writers who knew English were Johann Georg
Hamann, Johann Gottfried Herder and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
In the case of Sweden, it has been suggested that Among the eighteenth-
century travellers to England, the ability to make their way with at least
broken English was general’.26 Translations of English books into French,
German (often via French) and into other languages also multiplied from
this time onwards.27
## LOCALES OF ENCOUNTER
Like other cultural encounters, linguistic contacts are more intense in some
places than others, notably frontier zones and large polyglot cities. At worst,
the inhabitants of frontier zones spoke no language well. More exactly, they
were sometimes perceived as speaking no language well, as in the case of
eighteenth-century Wales, where the borderers were described as ‘a sort of
Mongrels that cannot speak Welsh or English correctly’.28 As for Ireland,
the inhabitants of Wexford in the age of Elizabeth were described by the
Englishman Richard Stanyhurst as speaking neither good English nor good
Irish, but instead as making ‘a mingle mangle or gallamaufrey of both the
languages and have in such a medley or checkerwyse .. . crabbedly jumbled
them together’.29
At best, though, the people who lived on frontiers dominated two or more
languages. In sixteenth-century Switzerland, for instance, one finds mem¬
bers of the Salis family writing letters in Latin, Italian, German, Romansh
and French.30 The story of Cardinal Granvelle, who came from another
border area, Besanfon in Franche-Comte, dictating to six secretaries in as
is Wilhelm Aehle, Die Anfdnge des Unterrichts in der engliscben Sprache, besonders auf den Ritter-
akademien (Hamburg, 1938); Thomas Finkenstaedt, ‘John Tompson’, in Schroder, Fremdsprache-
nunterricht, pp. 57—74.
26 Sven Rydberg, Svenska Studieresor till England under Frihetstiden (Uppsala, 1951), p. 421.
27 Mary B. Price and Lawrence M. Price, The Publication of English Literature in Germany in the
Eighteenth Century (Berkeley, 1934); Bernhard Fabian, ‘Englisch als neue Fremdsprache des 18.
Jahrhunderts’, in Dieter Kimpel (ed.), Mehrsprachigkeit in der deutschen Aufkldrung (Hamburg,
1985), pp. 178-96.
28 Quoted in Geraint H. Jenkins (ed.), The Welsh Language before the Industrial Revolution (Cardiff,
1997), p. 105.
29 Quoted in Patricia Palmer, Language and Conquest in Early Modern Ireland (Cambridge, 2001), p. 42.
30 Randolph C. Head, ‘A Plurilingual Family in the Sixteenth Century’, Sixteenth-Century Journal 26
## (1995). PP- 577-93-

ii8 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
many languages at the same time may be apocryphal, but it is at least plau¬
sibly located, since Granvelle’s correspondence offers supporting evidence
for his command of French, Spanish and Italian.51
As for the Netherlands, the English traveller Fynes Moryson - himself
no mean performer in this respect, speaking Italian, Spanish, French and
German - commented on ‘the Flemings general skill in strange languages’.32
It is not difficult to cite instances of this skill. 7 he ambassador Ogier
Ghiselin de Busbecq spoke six modern languages — Dutch, German, Italian,
Spanish, French and Croat - besides writing a famous account of the
Ottoman Empire in Latin. The painter Rubens corresponded in four lan¬
guages, Italian, French, Spanish and Flemish.
Extreme examples of this fluency include the Antwerp patrician Jan van
der Noot and the Ghent patrician Karel Utenhove. Noot published his
Verscheyden Poetische Werken/'Divers Oeuvres Poetiques in 1580, including
poems in French and Dutch and commentaries in Italian and Spanish,
while Utenhove published a book of poems in twelve languages. These
men were unusual even in their own culture, but they were, predictably,
Flemings rather than Frenchmen, Spaniards, Englishmen or Italians.35
Then there were polyglot cities, generally ports, such as Venice with its
Greek, Jewish and Slavonic quarters, Antwerp with its Italians, French,
Spaniards and Englishmen, or Amsterdam with its Germans, Scandina¬
vians, Jews, Huguenots and others. Thanks to their immigrants, these three
cities became centres of publishing in a number of languages. Sixteenth-
century Antwerp printers produced books in French, German, Spanish and
English as well as Latin and Flemish. The printers of Venice had a still wider
range that included Greek (demotic as well as ancient), Hebrew, Spanish,
Church Slavonic and Croat. However, even the Venetians were surpassed
by the printers of seventeenth-century Amsterdam, with a linguistic reper¬
toire that included French, English, Spanish, German, Yiddish, Russian,
Hungarian and Georgian. The rise of large cities — that is, cities with one
hundred thousand people or more, which was large by the standards of
the time — was a major social change in the early modern period, and its
linguistic consequences have still to be worked out.
The linguistic map of East-Central Europe was particularly fragmented,
contrasting with Western Europe on one side and Russia on the other. As
one Central European scholar puts it, the most variegated map of languages
31 Theodore Juste, La Revolution cles Pays-Bas sous Philippe II (Paris, 1860-3), P- 23°; Edmond Poullet
(ed.), Correspondance du cardinal de Gratwelle (Brussels, 1877).
31 Fynes Moryson, Shakespeare's Europe (London, 1903), p. 378.
33 Leonard W. Forster, The Poet 's Tongues: Multilingualism in Literature (Cambridge, 1970), pp. 30-5.

Mixing languages 119
was to be found in 'the lands between the Elbe and Dob, from the Baltic
to the Aegean’. In moving from one village to its neighbour in Hungary or
Transylvania, for example, it might be necessary to switch between German,
Hungarian, Slovak, Slovene or Romanian.34
Again, the Czech-speaking scholar Jan Komensky, better known inter¬
nationally as Comenius, described the Hungarian town of Sarospatak in
the middle of the seventeenth century as one in which at least five lan¬
guages were spoken, so that unless Latin is used, ‘one person understands
another no more than in the Tower of Babel’.35 From the point of view of
the study of community, it would have been good to know whether the five
languages were spoken by five groups of people or in five kinds of situation.
In any case, it is no wonder that Comenius, who spent much of his life
moving between speech communities in the Netherlands, England, Poland
and elsewhere, was much concerned with the best way to teach language,
or that he was obsessed with the need to see beneath the veil of language
and to study things rather than words.
Other polyglot areas could be found in early modern Europe. In the north
of Italy, there were places where French or German or a South Slav language
could be heard, and in the south there were villages where the inhabitants
spoke Greek or Albanian. In Sardinia in 1561, a Spanish Jesuit noted the
diversity of languages’, with Sardinian competing with Italian, Spanish
and - in the cities of Alghero and Cagliari - Catalan.36 In eighteenth-
century Finland, four languages coexisted, with each of the three ‘foreign’
languages (Swedish, Latin and German) performing a different function.37
In the British Isles, besides English and five Celtic languages (Irish, Welsh,
Scottish Gaelic, Cornish and Manx, still the language of most people on
the island until the beginning of the eighteenth century), there was also
a pocket of Flemish, thanks to immigration in the twelfth century. When
the painter Lucas de Heere visited Pembrokeshire in the 1570s, he spoke
to some people ‘who still spoke Flemish well, as they have learned it from
their parents and from father to son’ {die noch goed vlaemscb spraken tzelfde
aen haer ouders ende als van vader tot kindegheleert hebbende).-s
34 Janos Bak, ‘Linguistic Pluralism in Medieval Hungary’, in The Culture of Christendom, ed. Marc A.
Meyer (London, 1993), pp. 269-79, at P- 270; T6th, Literacy, pp. 54,138.
35 Quoted in Jean Beranger, ‘Latin et langues vernaculaires dans la Hongrie du 17c si£cle\ Revue
Historique 242 (1969), pp. 5-28, at p. 5.
36 Raimondo Turtas, ‘La questione linguistica nella Sardegna del ’500’, Quaderni sardi di storia 2 (1981),
pp. 55-86, at pp. 60-1.
37 Aur6lien Sauvageot, Elaboration de la langue finnoise (Paris, 1973).
3* Lucas de Heere, Beschrijvingder BritscheEilanden (Antwerp, i937)> P- 4®- Cf. Lauran Toorians, Wizo
Flandrensis and the Flemish Settlement in Pembrokeshire’, Cambridge Medieval Celtic Studies 20
(1990), pp. 99—118, at p. 115, a reference I owe to my Emmanuel colleague Liesbeth Van Houts.

## 120
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
## PERCEPTIONS OF MIXTURE
These coexisting languages naturally influenced or ‘interfered with one
another. As Martin Luther once remarked in the course of his ‘table talk’,
anticipating the modern linguists quoted earlier, ‘All languages are mixed
up’ (Omnes linguae inter se permixtae sunt. no. 2758). I he idea seems to
have been something of a commonplace, for the Alsatian humanist Beatus
Rhenanus made the same point in a somewhat more qualified way (puto
linguasomnes nonnihilesse mixtas, etpuram nullam).y> In the eighteenth cen¬
tury, the Italian writer Melchiorre Cesarotti concurred, writing in his essay
on Italian that ‘no language is pure’ (Niuna lingua epura).4° A good many
contemporaries were aware of the mixing process, which they described in
metaphors that were always vivid and often pejorative.
The French scholar-printer Henri Estienne, for instance, spoke of
‘incompetent householders' (mauvais menagers), who borrow from their
neighbours what they already have at home. References to borrowing,
‘robbing’ and to ‘pilfered’ words’ were legion at this time.41 Others spoke
of aping, la singerieM Yet others used the metaphor of ‘patching’, like
those who compared English to ‘a beggars patched cloak’.45 Or they used
the image of ‘broken’ language, like the German humanist Aventinus,
who rejected a German with ‘broken Latin words’ [zerbrochen lateinis-
chen Worten).44 Or they spoke in English of‘mingle-mangle’, in German of
Mischmasche.45 Or they spoke of‘bastard’ words, like the Dutch humanist
## Hendrik Spieghel.
Culinary metaphors were particularly common.46 Corrupt Latin was
known as ‘kitchen Latin’. Luther, for example, spoke of the kiichetilatein of
the papal letters, while Italian humanists had already referred to culinarius
Latinus or to coquinaria latinitas.47 Another common term was ‘macaronic’
39 Quoted in Monika Rossing-Hager, ‘Kiichenlatein und Sprachpurismus im fruhen 16. Jahrhundert’,
in Nikolaus Henkel and Nigel F. Palmer (eds.), Latein und Volksprache im deutschen Mittelalter,
1100-1500 (Tubingen, 1992), pp. 360-86, at p. 364.
40 Melchiorre Cesarotti, Saggio sopra la lingua italiana (1785: repr. in Emilio Bigi (ed.). Dal Muratori
al Cesarotti, Milan and Naples, i960), pp. 304-468, at p. 308.
41 Quoted in Blank, Broken English, pp. 33, 45, 177.
42 Quoted in Brunot, Languefranfaise, vol. 11, p. 201.
43 Moryson, Europe, p. 437; cf. Carew, quoted in Blank, Broken English, p. 33.
44 Quoted in Rossing-Hager, Kiichenlatein, p. 361.
43 Quoted in Jurgen Schiewe, Die Macht der Sprache: Fine Geschichte der Sprachlichkeit von der An tike
bis zur Gegenwart (Munich, 1998), p. 77.
46 Michel Jeanneret, A Feast of Words: Banquets and Table Talk in the Renaissance (1987: English trans¬
lation, Cambridge, 1991), pp. 199-227.
47 Paul Lehmann, ‘Mittelalter und Kiichenlatein' (1928: repr. in F.rforschung des Mittelalters, 5 vols.,
Leipzig, 1941), vol. 1, pp. 46-62, at p. 57; Rudolf Pfeiffer, 'Kiichenlatein’ (1931: repr. Ausgewdhlte
Schrifien, Munich, i960), pp. 183-7.

Mixing languages 121
Latin, referring not to what we know as macaroni but to gnocchi, which were
considered to be coarse and rustic food.48 The inventive translator Johann
Fischart rendered this term as Nudelverse,49 A sixteenth-century Frenchman
complained that French was becoming dine fricassee des mots de divers
pays’.50 An English term was ‘hotch-potch’ (a fifteenth-century word for
a pudding). An anonymous German pamphlet the Sprachverderber (‘Cor¬
rupter of Language’, 1643), criticized the Frenchified German as ‘half-baked’
(.Halbgebachenen Teutscher Frantzos). Today, Javanese describe the mix
of Indonesian and Javanese that is sometimes spoken as a ‘language salad’.51
Some languages were more mixed than others, or at least perceived as
such. Italian was described by Pierfrancesco Giambullari as ‘a combina¬
tion of different languages’ (un componimento di varie lingue), including
Etruscan, Greek, Latin, German and French.52 Spanish was both praised
and blamed for its borrowings from Latin, Arabic, Hebrew and the lan¬
guage of the Visigoths, who invaded the peninsula when the Roman Empire
declined. Juan de Valdes called it a ‘mixed language’ (lengua mezclada),
while Martin Viziana described it as ‘a mixture of many languages’ (mezcla
de muchos lenguas).53 Portuguese too was known to have borrowed many
Arabic words, some of which were listed in the history of the language by
Nunes de Leao.54
Yiddish is another obvious case of mixture, and its speakers were
denounced in 1699 because ‘they have mutilated, minced, distorted [gestiim-
melt, geradbrecht, verkehret\ the good German words . . . and mixed into
German countless Hebrew words and phrases’.55 German itself was per¬
ceived in the seventeenth century as a mixture that included words from
Latin, French, Spanish and Italian.56
English offers another frequently-cited example of mixing. According to
the Swiss humanist Conrad Gesner, ‘Today, the English language is of all the
48 Ugo E. Paoli, II latino maccheronico (Florence, 1959); Lucia Lazzerini, Ter latinos grossos: studio
sui sermoni mescidati’, Studi di Filologia Italiana 29 (1971), pp. 219-339; Lazzerini, ‘Aux origines
du macaronique’, Revue des langues romanes 86 (1982), pp. 11—33; Ivano Paccagnella, ‘Mescidanza e
macaronismo’, GiomaLe Storico della Letteratura Italiana 150 (1973), pp. 363-81.
49 Quoted in Jeanneret, Feast, p. 213. 50 Quoted in Brunot, Langue frangaise, p. i66n.
51 J. Joseph Errington, Language Shift (Cambridge, 1998), p. 98.
s1 Giambullari quoted in Marie-Lucie Demonet, Les voix du signe. Nature et origine du langage a la
Renaissance (1480-1580) (Paris, 1992), p. 375.
53 Juan de Valdes, Dicllogo de la lengua (written c. 1540: ed. Juan M. Lope Blanch, Madrid, 1969), p. 53;
Martin Viziana, Lihro de alabangas de las lenguas castellana y valenciana (Valencia, 1574), sig. A5,
verso.
54 Nunes de Leao, Origem, pp. 243-5.
55 Quoted in English in Weinreich, Yiddish Language, p. 103, and in German in Solomon A. Birnbaum,
Yiddish (Toronto, 1979), p. 45-
5<s Strassner, Sprachkultur, p. 66.

122 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
most mixed and corrupt’ (.Anglica omnium maxime mixta hodie corruptaque
videtur).57 As we have seen, some foreigners described it as the scum that
emerged when other languages were mixed in a pot (above, p. 68). It was
‘a language confused, bepieced with other tongues’ as the Anglo-Italian
translator John Florio famously complained, ‘so that if every language had
his own words again, there would but few remain for Englishmen’.^ It is
indeed fortunate for us all that loanwords do not have to be repaid.
Even some natives agreed with this description of English. It was ‘part
Dutch, part Irish, Saxon, Scotch, Welsh and indeed a gallimaufry of
many’, according to Thomas Heywood. Fynes Moryson linked borrow¬
ing to wealth or copiousness and asserted that ‘ I he English language . . .
being mixed is therefore more and not less to be esteemed’.59
## ENCOUNTERS AND EXCHANGES
A study ol linguistic hybridity in Europe cannot afford to neglect the
encounters between Europeans and the inhabitants of other continents,
the global level ol what Pierre Bourdieu called the ‘economy of linguis¬
tic exchanges’.60 The importance of certain kinds of individual in these
exchanges should be noted, especially translators and interpreters or more
generally people in motion, individually or in diasporas - merchants,
pilgrims, soldiers and refugees.
The importance of linguistic imports to Europe from Asia, Africa and
the Americas is well-known, especially the local terms for fauna, flora and
foods. ‘Chocolate’, ‘avocado’ and ‘tomato’ and similar words in Spanish,
Portuguese, French and other European languages all derived from Nahuatl.
‘Jaguar’, ‘cashew’ and ‘manioc’ came from Tupi. ‘Condor’, ‘puma’ and
‘quinine’ came from Quechua. New words to describe tropical weather
ranged from the ‘hurricane’ to the ‘typhoon’ or the ‘monsoon’.
It should be noted that the European languages in which African and
American terms are first attested are usually the languages of imperial
powers - Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, English and French. In German
or the Scandinavian or the Slav languages, these words generally appear
later. The story is rather different in the case of another imperial power,
the Ottoman Empire. Turkish borrowed extensively from other languages
in the early modern period, but mainly from Arabic and Persian, while
57 Conrad Gesner, Mitbridates (/.urich, 1555), p. 3.
58 Heywood quoted Blank, Broken English, p. 31; John Florio, First Fruits (London, 1578), chapter 27.
59 Moryson, Europe, p. 479.
60 l’icrre Bourdieu, Language and Symbolic Power (1982: English translation, Cambridge, 1991).

Mixing languages 123
Hungarian, Greek, Serbian, Bulgarian and other languages spoken by sub¬
ject peoples within the Ottoman Empire borrowed from Turkish.61
Words referring to items of material culture that were new in Europe
include: ‘pagoda’, an Indian term that was taken up first by the Portuguese
and then in French, Italian and English; ‘palanquin’, a word from Malay or
Javanese that made its way through Portuguese into English, Italian, French
and Spanish; ‘kris’, a Malay term for a special kind of curved sword that
entered Portuguese and then Italian in the sixteenth century; Veranda’, an
Indian word adopted first by the Portuguese and then, in the eighteenth
century, by the English and the French; ‘caftan’, from Turkish, first used in
English to describe Russian costume, and ‘assagai’, the Arabic name for a
spear used in Africa, already recorded in English by 1625.
From the New World came such terms as ‘canoe’, originally a Taino
word from Hispaniola that passed into Spanish, English and French, and
‘wampum’ and ‘wigwam’, which entered English from the language of the
Amerindian neighbours of the settlers in Massachusetts.
Of special interest to social historians are terms that refer to local customs
and social roles and so testify to an increasing European knowledge of non-
European societies. For example, a cluster of terms from the Muslim world
entered a number of European languages in the sixteenth century. They
include: cadi, the Arabic word for a Muslim judge; sheikh, recorded in
Italian and in English; aga, a Turkish word for ‘lord’, found in French
and in Italian; sultan, a Turkish word that entered Italian and English;
pasha, a Turkish word found in Italian, English (in the form ‘bashaw’) and
French; dervish, a Persian term found in French; imam, an Arabic word for
a religious leader that is recorded in French in 1559 and in English in 1613,
and muezzin, the Arabic or Turkish word for the man who calls the faithful
to prayer, which entered both French and English.
Neologisms from other regions describing social roles were less com¬
mon, a fact that may well be significant. They included: bonze, a Japanese
term that entered Portuguese and then Italian before spreading to other
languages, such as English; mandarin (used in English in 1589, borrowed
from the Portuguese), and cacique, a term for a ‘big man’ that originated
in Santo Domingo and was adopted into Spanish and later into English.
Turning to the language of institutions, we find the same preponderance
of words from the world of Islam, including: caravanserai, a Persian term
that passed into Italian, French and English; bazaar, taken into Italian
61 Kemal H. Karpat, ‘A Language in Search of a Nation: Turkish in the Nation-State’, in Scaglione
(ed.). Emergence, pp.175-208, at pp. 188-92.

## 124
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
and then into English, and harem., current in English by 1634. Casta was
the word the Portuguese adopted to describe the Indian social system, later
borrowed by the Italians, the French and the English. From North America
came powwow, taken into English by 1642.
The idea of the ‘Columbian exchange’ in ecology might be extended
to the case of language.62 The fortunes in the New World of Spanish and
English have been studied in particular detail.63 The studies concentrate
on the words that the Europeans took from Indian languages, but they
include movement in the other direction, from Spanish into Nahuatl, for
instance. By the late sixteenth century, we learn, Spanish loanwords ‘were
asserting their presence strongly in Nahuatl’: alcalde, for example (‘mayor’),
anima (‘soul’), caballo (‘horse’), compadre (‘godfather’), dios (‘god’), firma
(‘signature’), misa (‘Mass’), queso (‘cheese’) and virrey (‘viceroy’). The num¬
ber of words borrowed from the religious and political domains is worth
noting.64 At much the same time, in the world of trade, some Basque words
were becoming current in the Gulf of St Lawrence. They included anaia,
‘brother’, and the phrase Nola zaudei, ‘how are you?’65
European intervention also disturbed what might be called the ‘ecological
balance’ between local languages in the New World. The missionaries,
especially the Jesuits, employed and encouraged the use of a koine, the
so-called lingua geral in Brazil, based on Tupi, and the lenguas generales in
Mexico, based on Nahuatl, and in Peru, based on Quechua and Aymara.
It is true that Quechua had been used in this way by the Incas before the
Spaniards arrived, but the Jesuits employed it more extensively.66 The point
was - as in the Europe of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation — to
reach as many people as possible with the least effort.
61 Alfred W. Crosby, The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences 0/1492 (Newport,
## CT, 1972).
63 On Spanish, Rufino J. Cuervo, ‘El Castellano en America , Bulletin Hispanique 3 (1901), pp. 35-62;
Angel Rosenblat, ‘La hispanizacion de America. El castellano y las lenguas indigenas desde 1492’, in
Los conquistadoresy su lengua (Caracas, 1977), pp. 91-136; Emma Martinell Gifre, Aspectos linguisticos
deldescubrirnientoy del conquista (Madrid, 1988); Maria Beatriz Fontanella de Weinberg, ‘La lengua
espanola in America durante el peri6do colonial’, in Ana Pizarro (ed.), America Latina: Palavra,
Literatura, Cultura (Sao Paulo, 1993), pp. 493-500; Juan Antonio Fraso Gracia, Historia del espanol
de America (Madrid, 1999), On English, Joey L. Dillard, Toward a Social History of American English
(Berlin, 1985); Gray and Fiering, language Encounter.
64 James Lockhart, The Nahua after the Conquest (Stanford, 1992), pp. 100, 291.
65 James Axtell, ‘Babel of Tongues: Communicating with the Indians in Eastern North America’, in
Gray and Fiering, Language Encounter, pp. 15-60, at pp. 30—2.
66 Pedro de Ribera y Chaves wrote in 1586 of ‘the Quechua lengua general: quoted in Bruce Mannheim,
The Language ofthe Inka since the European Invasion (Austin, 1991), p. 45. On lenguas generales before
the Spanish arrived, Yakov Malkiel, ‘A Linguist’s View of the Standardization of a Dialect’, in
Scaglione, Emergence, pp. 51-73, at p. 61.

Mixing languages
## 125
## THE CASE OF PORTUGUESE ABROAD
Since the fortunes of English and Spanish in the New World have been
studied quite intensely, it may be more useful to concentrate attention on
Portuguese. In his praises of his vernacular, published in 1540, Joao de Barros
drew attention to borrowings from Asian languages in particular, referring
to these appropriations as examples of Portuguese ‘conquest’. Among his
examples were lascarim, a soldier, and sumbaya, derived from a Malay word
that means to bow with one’s arms crossed.67 In what follows, however,
the emphasis will fall on the triangular relations of Portuguese with the
Amerindian languages of Brazil and the African languages spoken by the
slaves who were brought to the New World from about 1600 onwards to
work on the sugar plantations.68
The Jesuit Jose de Anchieta, who wrote hymns in Tupi, introduced into
the language words for concepts that the Indians apparently lacked, such as
‘grace’ [graga), ‘virgin’ (virgem) and ‘sin’ (pecado)M Conversely, some Tupi
words entered Portuguese and later, other European languages: words for
animals, such as the jaguar (iaguara) or the anteater (,tamandud), birds, such
as the tucan, fish, such as the piranha, fruit, such as the maracuja, plants,
such as mandioca, and vegetation, such as the caatinga, the prickly bushes
of the desert or backlands. Even now, many Brazilians speak Tupi every day
without realizing that they are doing so, since the names of many places
are Tupi names. The famous falls of Igua^u, for instance, include the term
agu, meaning ‘large’; the state of Para derives its name from the Tupi word
for ‘sea’, while the state of Paraiba takes the final part of its name, iba, from
the word for ‘tree’.
Brazilian Portuguese also borrowed about three hundred words from the
different Central or West African languages spoken by the slaves - words
for food, such as palm oil (azeite de dende), or for housing (mucambo,
‘shanty’, or senzala, ‘slave quarters’, or quilombo, a village founded by slaves
who had fled from the plantations). Words for music and dance often
came from Africa, including samba and afoxe, ‘rattle’. So did words for
religious practices, such as candomble, or for holy people, such as orixd,
67 Joao de Barros, Didlogo (1540: ed. Luciana Stegnano Picchio, Modena, 1959), pp. 81, 103.
68 Joao H. Rodrigues, ‘The Victory of the Portuguese Language in Colonial Brazil’, in Alfred Hower
and Richard A. Preto-Rodas (eds.), Empire in Transition (Gainsville, 1985), pp. 32-64; Edith Pimentel
Pinto, ‘O portugu&s no Brasil: epoca colonial’, in Pizarro, America Latina, pp. 515-26; Diogo Ramada
Curto, ‘A lingua e o imperio’, in Francisco Bethencourt and Kirti Chaudhuri (eds.), Historia da
expansaoportuguesa, voi. 1 (Lisbon, 1998), pp. 414-33.
69 Jose de Anchieta, Liricaportuguesa e Tupi, ed. Armando Cardoso (Sao Paulo, 1984), pp. 157,171,178.

## 126
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
‘god’ or ‘saint’, and babalorixd, literally ‘father of the saint’, a person who
is regularly possessed by an African divinity.
As a result of colonisation and the slave trade, a number of creoles
developed in the early modern period, based on French (in Haiti, Louisiana
etc.), on Dutch (in the Virgin Islands and perhaps in South Africa), on
English (the Krio of the Guinea Coast and the Patwa of Jamaica), and
especially on Portuguese, in Malacca, Macau, Goa, Sao Iome and other
places.70 For example, a French visitor to Senegal in the late seventeenth
century remarked that the inhabitants of that country spoke not only their
own language but also ‘a certain jargon that has only very little resemblance
to Portuguese and is known as creole’ (un certain jargon qui n ’a que tres
peu de resemblance a la langue portugaise et qu'on nomme langue creole),
comparing it to the lingua franca of the Mediterranean.7'
The next stage was the development of what has been called ‘planta¬
tion creole’, and finally that of distinctive dialects of Portuguese, English
or French, which still retain traces of their origins. For instance, the use
in African American English of the phrase ‘too much’ for ‘very much’ is a
borrowing from the Portuguese demais, which has both meanings, while
the syntax as well as the vocabulary of some Black Englishes is marked by
Africanisms, derived from West African languages, such as Yoruba.”1 Some
sixteenth-century Portuguese plays, like the Auto das regateiras, by Antonio
Ribeiro Chiado, reproduced Black Portuguese, the so-called ‘lingua de
preto’. For example, the sentence ‘I have not finished dressing’, Eu ndo
acabei de me vestir, turned into A mi ndo caba best, simplifying the gram¬
mar, dropping parts of words and pronouncing the v as a b. In other plays
blacks are represented as using a simplified form of Portuguese in which
verbs are reduced to infinitives and the question, Como chamar terra vossoV
(‘how call your country?’) receives the answer, Terra meu nunca saber (‘my
country never know’).73
## MIXING IN EUROPE
European languages also displayed a tendency to mix. As we have seen
(above, p. 97), the rise of some standard written vernaculars was often the
70 John A. Holm, Pidgins and Creoles, 2 vols. (Cambridge, 1988), vol. u.
71 Quoted in Robert Chaudenson, Les creolesfran(dis (Paris, 1979), p. 9.
71 Gilberto Freyre, The Masters and the Slaves (1933: English translation, New York, 1946); Melville
J. Herskovits and Frances S. Herskovits, Suriname Folklore (New York, 1936), pp. 117-35; Joey L-
Dillard, Black English: its History and Use in the United States (New York, 1972); Dillard, American
English, pp. 108-27.
73 Antdnio Ribeiro Chiado, Auto das regateiras, ed. Giulia Lanciani (Rome, 1970), p. 61; Anthony J.
Naro, A Study on the Origins of Pidginisation’, Language 54 (1978), pp. 314-47; cf. Curto, A lingua
e o imp£rio’.

Mixing languages 127
result of the mixing of dialects. Again, in Europe, as in other continents,
the existence of several pidgins or trade languages can be documented from
the early modern period. The original lingua franca, a mix of Venetian,
Portuguese and Arabic that was known in the Mediterranean world in the
Middle Ages, was even more important in the so- called ‘age of piracy’,
between 1600 and 1830.74
Again, around the year 1500, Low German was widely used as a commer¬
cial language in northern Europe, in the area where the German-dominated
Hanseatic League operated. It was used so frequently in Scandinavia that it
produced ‘interference’, dissolving some of the case endings in Danish and
Swedish. In Denmark, High German was employed in the early modern
period in a number of domains, such as the court and the army as well as
commerce, and mixtures of Danish and German were not uncommon.75 In
Eastern Europe too, at least in cities, German could often be heard, because
a substantial proportion of the urban population was German in origin.
These well-known examples do not exhaust the repertoire. During the
Renaissance, Italian might be used as a lingua franca among scholars and
artists, as French would be used later. For example, the French scholar
Nicholas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc and the Flemish painter Peter Paul Rubens
wrote to one another in Italian in the 1620s, and Peiresc used the same lan¬
guage to write to the imperial librarian of Vienna after the librarian had
explained that he lacked expertise in French.76 It is unlikely that many peo¬
ple spoke the Basque-Icelandic pidgin documented from the seventeenth
century, but it was important for sailors, fishermen and whalers.77
With travel and translation and the rise of language learning came
what might be called the ‘invasion’ of some languages by others in cer¬
tain domains such as commerce or the arts. Italy was especially impor¬
tant in both domains. In the case of commerce, one thinks of the term
banco (originally ‘bench’, where the money-changers sat) and the related
terms banchiere and bancarotto, adopted into English (‘bank’, ‘banker’,
74 Keith Whinnom, ‘Lingua Franca: Historical Problems’, in Albert Valdman (ed.), Pidgin and Creole
Linguistics (Bloomington, 1977), pp. 295-310; Manlio Cortelazzo, ‘Lingua franca’, in Hans Georg
Beck, Manoussos Manoussacas and Agostino Pertusi (eds.), Venezia centro di mediazione tra Oriente e
Occidente (Florence, 1977), pp. 523-35; Guido Cifoletti, La lingua franca mediterranea (Padua, 1989),
p. 23.
75 Olav Brattegard, Die mittelniederdeutsche Geschdftsprache des hansischen Kaufmanns zu Bergen
(Bergen, 1945); Willy Sanders, Sachsensprache, Hansesprache, Plattdeutsch: Sprachgeschichtliche
Grundzuge des Niederdeutscben (Gottingen, 1982); Vibeke Winge, Ddnische Deutsche - deutsche
Ddnen. Geschichte der deutschen Sprache in Ddnemark 1300-1800 (Heidelberg, 1992), pp. 130-46;
Jahr, Language Change, pp. 127-8.
76 Nicholas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc, Lettres, ed. Philippe Tamizey de Larroque, 7 vols. (Paris, 1888—98);
Peter N. Miller, Peirescs Europe (New Haven, 2000), p. 163.
77 Peter Bakker, ‘A Basque Nautical Pidgin’, Journal of Pidgin and Creole 2 (1987), pp. 1-30.

## 128
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
‘bankrupt’), French, German, Spanish, and so on. Again, cassa, ‘chest’ and
cassiere, the person looking after the chest, came to mean ‘cash’ and ‘cashier’.
Bilancia, ‘balance’, in its financial sense, was also a term that was widely
adopted.
In architecture, technical terms such as arcada, architrava, balcone,
casamatta, colonna, cornice, cupola, facciata, pedimento, piazza, pilastro, por¬
tico and villa entered a number of European languages at the Renaissance.
In music, the invasion came later, mainly in the eighteenth century, and
included allegro, andante, cantata, concerto, opera, oratorio, pianoforte, solo,
sonata and soprano7X
Conquest too played its part within Europe, as in the case of the Spanish
terms which entered Italian in Lombardy, in the south, and also in Genoa,
for example the word menino, ‘boy’ (in the sense of‘page’), a reminder of the
influence of early modern courts on linguistic practices. Around two hun¬
dred Spanish and Portuguese words are known to have established them¬
selves in Italian in the course of the sixteenth century. 9 When the island
of Gotland was incorporated into the Swedish Empire, its inhabitants, like
those of Skane (below, p. 162) were expected to make the transition from
Danish to Swedish. Letters written by Gotlanders in the seventeenth cen¬
tury show that the way from one language to the other was via a mixture
of the two.80
Not only words but whole phrases were transplanted from one language
to another. In England, what was known from Milton’s time onwards as ‘law
French’ was a kind of mixed language, French in structure but increasingly
English in vocabulary (to say nothing of pronunciation). The sub-titles of
two famous legal works of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries are perhaps
sufficient to reveal the flavour of the language: Thomas Littleton’s Tenures:
ouesque certain cases addesper auters depuisne temps, and Edmund Plowden’s
Commentaries: ou reports de divers cases esteant matters en ley.
Again, phrases from foreign languages, notably Latin, Italian and French,
were in regular use as symbols of prestige or cosmopolitanism. In the sev¬
enteenth and eighteenth centuries, Germans who belonged to the upper
classes or wished to be taken to be upper-class might introduce into
7fl Marjatta Wis, Ricerche sopra gli italianismi nella lingua tedesca (Helsinki, 1955), pp. 75-87; Gian¬
franco Folena, ‘L’italiano come lingua per musica’, in L italiano in Europa: esperienze linguistiche del
Settecento (Turin, 1983), pp. 228-9, 2.62-4.
79 Gian Luigi Beccaria, Spagnolo e spagnoli in Italia (Milan, 1968); Mari D’ Agostino, La Piazza e
I'altare: momenti della politico linguistica delht chiesa siciliana (Palermo, 1988), p. 806.
K" Jens Lerbom, Mellan tvd riken: Integration, Politisk kultur ocb fdrnationella identiteter pd Gotland
tSoo—iyoo (Lund, 2003), pp. 128-32. My thanks to Hanne Sanders for drawing my attention to this
book and sending me a copy.

Mixing languages 129
everyday conversation French phrases such as epee a la main or mon treschere
ami}1
## THE ARMY AS A MELTING POT
For a case-study of this kind of invasion, it may be interesting to look not at
the domain of the arts, which has been studied so often, but that of warfare.
The military speech community deserves to be taken seriously, since the
armies of the period were polyglot, extremely mobile and also increasing
rapidly in size in the course of the period. Unlike the social history of
armies, which flourishes, military language seems to be relatively neglected
by historians of early modern Europe and even by linguists.82
The first point to make here is that armies were often international orga¬
nizations. The Spanish army in the Netherlands, for example, included
Englishmen, Irish, Germans and Italians. Its language was probably trans¬
mitted along the 'military corridors’ of the Army of Flanders, including the
famous ‘Spanish Road’ from Milan to Brussels.83 At a time when soldiers
were billeted on civilians rather than confined to barracks, military terms
could spread relatively rapidly through the civilian world: official terms,
such as the names of ranks, from corporal to Field Marshal; technical terms
for weapons, such as arquebus or bayonet, and unofficial, perhaps slang
terms, like ‘iorage’, ‘plunder’, or ‘deserter’.
The Thirty Years’ War in particular, in which not only German states but
also France, Spain, the Dutch Republic, Denmark and Sweden took part,
encouraged the rise of an international military language that was current
from Portugal to Poland or even beyond, although at the frontiers of the
Ottoman Empire it yielded to a rival military language of Arabic-Turkish
origin. The Western variety of military language was composed in the main
of romance words, though disentangling the Italian, French and Spanish
elements is not always easy.
In this domain, the French, for instance, seem to have contributed a
number of terms for military hardware, including arquebus, artillerie, bay-
onette, cartouche and pique, as well as words for vanguard and rearguard
(,avant-garde, arriere-garde). The share of the Italians included bastione,
81 William J. Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary 1575—1648 (Berlin, 1976);
Richard J. Brunt, The Influence of the French Language on the German Vocabulary, 1649-1735 (Berlin,
## 1983).
81 For exceptions, see William A. Coates, ‘The German Pidgin-Italian of the Sixteenth-Century
Lanzichenecchi, Papers from the Fourth Annual Kansas Linguistics Conference (1969), pp. 66-74;
Robert A. Verdonk, La lengua espahola en Flandes en elsiglo xvti (Madrid, 1980).
83 Geoffrey Parker, The Spanish Road (Cambridge, 1972), esp. pp. 50-105.

## 130
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
battaglione, infanteria, moschetto (musket), scaramuccia (skirmish), sentinello
and squadrone. For their part, the Spaniards contributed alferez (ensign),
amotinarse (to mutiny), bandolero, casco (casque), guerrilla, merodear
(‘maraud’), morrion (‘morion’, a kind of helmet) and tercio (a body of
troops) together with a number of terms recognizable by their distinc¬
tive ending in — ada, such as armada, camarada, emboscada (‘ambuscade’),
escalada, parada and retirada (‘retreat’).
Well over a hundred military terms came into German from romance
languages, mainly French, between 1575 and 1648. 84 A number of these were
transmitted to Scandinavia and Eastern Europe via military treatises such
as Wilhelm Dilich’s Kriegsbuch (1607) or Johann Wallhausen’s Kriegskunst
(1615). It is likely that the Swedish infanteri, for instance, the Danish pik,
the Hungarian dragonyer, the Polish kasarnia (Kasern, ‘barracks’) and the
Russian mushket were transmitted in this way.
It was also from German or Dutch (directly or via Polish or Ruthenian),
that a number of naval, administrative and technical terms entered
Russian from the middle of the seventeenth century onwards. The new
naval vocabulary was mainly Dutch, including matroos (sailor), mast, stu-
urboordand zeil (sail), while the English contributed ‘brig’. The vocabulary
of ranks and institutions was mainly German, including admiral, advokat,
akademiya, baron, dekret, president and senator. Borrowing went so far that
even Peter the Great, who generally approved of learning from the West,
once complained about a Russian diplomat who used ‘very many Polish
and other foreign words and terms’. The process continued after Peter’s
time, although borrowing from French overtook borrowing from German
around the middle of the eighteenth century.85
Phis process of borrowing and mixing may be shown in action with the
help of a case-study within this case-study, the letters ol General Albrecht
von Wallenstein during the Thirty Years War. Wallenstein’s letters are
peppered with Italian, Spanish or French words, such as abociren (from
s’aboucher, ‘to enter into discussion’), ambasciada, armada, campagnia, capo,
cavaliero, commando, and so on. Sometimes the general uses whole phrases,
such as per inganiarme meglio (hispanizing the Italian ingannare), but mixed
phrases are more common, such as meine disegni, einposto, solchen travaglio,
dem basta, kein tregua or Guberno-sachen.
K1 I counted 124 such terms (omitting rare uses) in Jones, Lexicon.
85 Vinogradov, Russian Literary Language, pp. 33, 36; Gerta HUttl-Worth, Foreign Words in Russian: A
Historical Sketch, 1550-1800 (Berkeley, 1963), esp. pp. 9-11.
8,5 ‘the better to deceive me’; ‘my plans’; 'a post’; ‘such labour’; ‘the sufficient’; ‘no truce’; ‘matters of
state’: Albrecht von Wallenstein, Briefe, ed. Ferdinand Tadra (Vienna, 1879), passim.

Mixing languages
## 131
## PRAGMATIC MIXING
Wallenstein also made use of Latin phrases in his letters, as was common
in his day, especially though not exclusively among German speakers from
Luther to Leibniz. In similar fashion, in parts of Europe where Latin was
not in use, Ruthenia for instance, clerks sometimes produced documents
in a mixture of Church Slavonic with the local vernaculars.87
Luther, for instance, in his table talk, asserting that war simply takes away
what God gives, such as religion, political order, marriage, wealth, dignity,
studies and so on, says Bellum nimbt simpliciter als bin weg, was Got geben
kan, religionem, politiam, coniugium, opes, dignitatem, studia, etc (no. 282).
Attempts have been made to work out the - presumably unconscious —
rules which Luther followed in his rapid switches between languages, using
German, for instance, to speak of more personal matters, Latin for public
issues and also for abstractions such as accidentia, allegoria, causa, conse¬
quents and so on.88 As for Leibniz, he took a considerable interest in the
German language, and argued on occasion (as Schupp had done earlier,
p. 76 above) that it was an appropriate language for philosophy. All the
same, he went on using Latin and French, in order to reach a wider audience
and also, in all probability, so as to avoid neologisms.89
As Lucien Febvre pointed out long ago in the case of French, words such
as absolute’ and ‘relative’, ‘abstract’ and ‘concrete’ were lacking in most
vernaculars in the sixteenth century and the deficiency was supplied from
Latin.90 There was a similar problem in German. Today we are accustomed
to think of German as the language of abstractions par excellence, at least
in Europe. The concepts which are central to this book, notably ‘speech
community’ (Sprachgemeinschaft), ‘language culture’ {Sprachkultur), or ‘lan¬
guage consciousness’ (Sprachbewusstsein), often originated in German. It is
something of a shock to discover how poor in abstractions the German
language was until the eighteenth century, the age of the philosophers
Christian Wolff and Immanuel Kant. Fatin filled a serious gap.
In Wallenstein’s case, which was not untypical, abstract ideas were
expressed with Latin nouns such as praeparatoria and set Latin phrases
87 Antoine Martel, La languepolonaise dans lespays ruthenes, Ukraine et Russie Blanche, is6p-i66y (Lille,
1938), p. 147.
88 Birgit Stolt, Die Sprachmischung in Luthers Tischreden (Stockholm, 1964), especially the list of Latin
nouns, pp. 59-73; Els Oksaar, ‘Social Networks, Communicative Acts and the Multilingual Individ¬
ual’, in Jahr, Language Change, pp. 3—19, at p. 14.
89 Yvon Belaval, ‘Leibniz et la langue allemande’ (1947: repr. Etudes Leibniziennes, Paris, 1976), pp. 25-
## 36.
90 Lucien Febvre, The Problem of Unbelief in the Sixteenth Century: the Religion of Rabelais (1942: English
translation, Cambridge, MA, 1982), p. 385.

## 132
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
such as pro forma or in summa. Documents of the period were often writ¬
ten in a similar mixture of Latin and the vernacular. That military and
civilian officials often spoke in this way too is suggested by the minutes
of meetings of the imperial privy council, like the meeting in which one
of Wallenstein’s colleagues switched from German to Latin in the course of
arguing that ‘as regards how many troops to put in the field the conference
of war should decide, because they are experts in military affairs’ (So viell die
Anzahl des Kriegsvolcks anlangt, gebore ad militarem conferentiam, ad quam
belli periti).91
German was not the only language into which people mixed Latin in this
way. The Swedish chancellor Axel Oxenstierna regularly used Latin phrases
in addressing the Council of State (Riksrad) about the war in Germany,
referring to the principalis scopus of the war, arma spiritualia, statuspublicus
and so on.92 This was not a parade of learning. Like German, Swedish still
lacked these useful abstractions.93
A similar point may be made about Polish and Hungarian in the seven¬
teenth century. For example, the journal kept by the Polish gentleman Jan
Chryzostom Pasek is full of Latin words and phrases, per nexum sanguinis
(‘through a blood relationship’), for instance, omnibus modis (‘in all ways’),
sub praetextu (‘under the pretext’), verba pro verbis (‘word for word’) and so
on.94 No wonder that satirists such as Krzysztof Opalinski mocked Poles
who spoke ‘macaronically’ (macaronice). The autobiography of the Hun¬
garian aristocrat Miklos Bethlen, a generation later than Pasek's, employs
Latin phrases on almost every page: ab anno (‘from the year’), ex dictamine
conscientiae (‘following the dictates of conscience’), or experientia teste (‘as
experience testifies’).95
Latin phrases could also be heard in the debates in the English House
of Commons. A speech delivered by Sir Edwin Sandys on 8 March 1621
included the words and phrases iniuria (‘injury’); crimen lesae Maiestatis
(‘the crime of lese-majesty’); nihil utile quod inhonestum (‘nothing that is
dishonourable is useful’; meum et tuum (‘mine and thine’); coram domino
rege (‘in the presence of the king’). However, these phrases are less frequent
than in the continental texts quoted above. They tend to be either phrases
from Roman law or quotations from classical authors.96
91 Albrecht von Wallenstein, Briefe, ed. Hermann Hallwich (Vienna, 1912), pp. 126-7.
91 Michael Roberts, Gustavus Adolphus, vol. 11, 1626-52 (London, 1958), p. 419. Further examples in
N. A. Kullberg (ed.), Svenska Riksrddets Protokoll (Stockholm, 1878) and Stolt, Sprachmischung,
## PP- ^3-5-
93 On Danish, Skautrup, Danskesprog, pp. 301-2. 94 Jan Pasek, Pamiftnik (Cracow, 1929).
95 Mikl6s Bethlen, Oniletlrasa, 2 vols. (Budapest, 1955).
96 Wallace Notestein (ed.), Commons Debates 1621, vol. 2 (New Haven 1935), pp. 191—5.

Mixing languages 133
Conversely, university lectures, which were supposed to be delivered in
Latin, might include phrases in a vernacular, so that an English student who
attended Guy Patin’s lectures on medicine in Paris in 1664, recorded that ‘I
was much disappointed in my expectation of understanding all he said by
reason he used the French tongue so much’. Sermons too might be mixed,
as they often were in the later Middle Ages in England, France, Italy and
elsewhere: based on Latin but with frequent expressions in the vernacular.97
Mixing could be found in print as well as in speech and writing. Indeed,
in some books the use of Latin phrases in a vernacular text was emphasized
by printing them in Roman type where the rest of the text was in black
letter.
Still more common was the practice of taking Latin words and natural¬
izing them into the vernacular, making it richer and more dignified at the
same time. Many words in the languages of Western Europe which have
Latin roots were coined in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, though
we tend to notice only the coinages that have not survived, like ‘idoneus’
(suitable), as in the Scottish phrase ‘apt and idoneus for the ministry’. In
the case of Russian, on the other hand, the vernacular was enriched and ele¬
vated by borrowings from Church Slavonic. Indeed, the German scholar
Heinrich Ludolf claimed that Russians used slavonicisms in speaking as
a way of showing off.98 In these cases we should speak not so much of
pragmatic mixing as of borrowed majesty.
## PLAYFUL MIXING: THE RISE OF MACARONICS
A knowledge of this everyday mixing of Latin with the vernacular makes it
easier to see the point of the more elaborate and playful mixing in literature
which might be called ‘macaronics’ on the analogy of‘ebonies’.
It may be useful to distinguish two senses of the term ‘macaronic’. In
the broad sense, it refers to any kind of code switching or code mixing in a
literary work. This was a not uncommon medieval practice, especially in
poetry. In the more precise sense of the term, though, ‘macaronic’ Latin,
with its partly vernacular vocabulary combined with Latin syntax, was an
invention of the fifteenth century. It seems to have developed out of student
slang at the University of Padua. A famous example is that of the mock-
epics of the poet Teofilo Folengo in early sixteenth-century Italy, but other
97 Edward Browne, Journal (London, 1923), p. 3; Lazzerini, ‘Sermoni’; Siegfried Wenzel, Macaronic
sermons: bilingualism and preaching in late Medieval England (Ann Arbor, 1994).
98 Vladimir V. Vinogradov, The History of the Russian Literary Language from the Seventeenth Century
to the Nineteenth (1949: condensed adaptadon, Madison, 1969), p. 4.

## 134
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
examples of macaronic Latin are not hard to find, in Germany, for instance,
in Spain (where practitioners of the genre included the humanist Juan de
Vergara), and in Scotland, where Ben Jonson’s friend John Drummond of
Hawthornden wrote a mock-heroic poem about the conflict between two
feudal ladies, in which he used hybrid phrases such as crossare fenestras for
‘go past the windows’."
Macaronic verses were particularly common in France. The lawyer Jean
Germain wrote a poem mocking Charles V’s invasion of Provence, a poem
which he described as being in mesclatas linguas, a phrase neatly exem¬
plifying the phenomenon to which it refers. It contains lines such as
‘drinc drinc” clamant omnes tunc lansaquaneti (the German mercenaries
or Lanzknechten).IO° Another lawyer, Jean Richard of Dijon, described the
French religious wars in a poem which refers to Suyssos, Lansqnettos . . .
cum vestrispicquis tremulis (‘wavering pikes’) and pistoliferos Reistros (pistol¬
bearing cavalry, the notorious German Reiter).101
A slightly macaronic prose was deployed for satirical purposes in the
famous Epistolae Obscurorum Virorum or ‘Letters of Obscure Men’, writ¬
ten by humanists in Germany in the 1520s to ridicule the culture or lack
of culture of their conservative opponents in the universities.102 Later in
the century, the Calvinist humanist Theodore Beza would use the same
technique in his satire on the Church of Rome, the Passavant. Texts such
as these well illustrate the interanimation of three languages or varieties,
classical Latin, medieval Latin and the vernacular.103
In similar fashion, the mixing of different vernaculars, whether languages
or dialects, was deployed for comic effect by writers and especially by
playwrights.
Panurge, for example, when he first meets Pantagruel in chapter nine of
Rabelais’s romance, speaks to him in two invented languages and ten real
ones, German, Italian, English, Basque, Dutch, Spanish, Danish, Hebrew,
Greek and Latin. Rabelais was extremely interested in language and in the
linguistic debates of his day, as various chapters of Gargantua and Pantagruel
show quite clearly.104
In France in the fifteenth century, the farce Maitre Pierre Pathelin had
already employed the mixture ol languages as a comic device. Pathelin
99 Antonio Torres-Alcalit, Vrrbigratia: los escritores macarronicos de Espana (Madrid. 1984), pp. 77, 90;
John Drummond, Polerno-Middinia inter Vitaruam et Bebernam (c. 1645), quoted in Robert H.
MacDonald (ed.), William Drummond: Poems and Prose (Edinburgh, 1976), pp. 196—7.
100 Jean Germain, ‘Historia bravissima Caroli Quinti’ (1537: in Fausta Garavini and Lucia Lazzerini
(eds.), Macaronee provenzali, Milan-Naplcs, 1984), pp. 251-78, at p. 267.
101 Octave Delepierre, Macaroneana, vol. 11 (London, 1862-3), PP- 109-11.
101 Bakhtin, Rabelais, pp. 81-2. 103 Bakhtin, ‘Prehistory’, p. 81.
104 Claude-Gilbert Dubois, My the et langage au i6e siecle (Bordeaux, 1970); Demonet, Voix, pp. 178-9.

Mixing languages 135
buys some cloth and does not pay for it. When the draper visits Pathelin
to demand his money, the rogue pretends not to understand him and
speaks in Limousin, Picard, Flemish, Norman, Breton and Latin in order to
create confusion. Rabelais was inspired by this scene and acknowledges his
fifteenth-century predecessor by slipping in a reference to langaigepatelinois.
Pathelin did not stand alone in late medieval French drama in its use of
different languages for comic effect. The anonymous Valet qui vole son
maitre includes passages in Picard and Lombard. In what has been called
the Occitan Renaissance of the later sixteenth century, plays were composed
in a mixture of French and Provencal. In some of these plays, the negative
characters speak French while the positive ones speak patois.105
In Venice, the playwright Andrea Calmo reproduced the carnival of
dialects to be heard on the streets of the city.106 Thus in Calmo’s Spagnolas
(c. 1549), we hear a peasant speaking his local dialect, a German coal-heaver,
a schoolmaster from Ragusa (Dubrovnik), a soldier speaking Bergamask
with occasional Spanish words and another soldier, from Albania, speaking
a mixture of Venetian and a little Greek (described by another comic writer
of the time as ‘this Greek-Italian language of ours’, chesta nostra lingua
gresesca talianao). If we include the urban Venetian of the other characters,
that makes six speech varieties altogether. In another text one of Calmo’s
characters speaks what is called ‘turco’, in other words Venetian with a
Turkish accent and the odd Turkish word.107
The commedia dell’arte, which has been described as a comedy of dialects,
carried on this tradition, with Pantalone speaking Venetian, Dottore Bolog¬
nese, Capitano Neapolitan and so on. Another Venetian, Carlo Goldoni,
revived this tradition in the eighteenth century, with plays such as IRusteghi
and Sior Todero in Venetian and Le Baruffe Chiozziote in the dialect of
Chioggia, a small town a few miles from Venice.108 In Spain, polyglot
comedies were written by Juan de Timoneda and by Lope de Vega, who
wrote bilingual scenes in Spanish and macaronic Latin, Italian, French
and Flemish, as well as introducing phrases in Arabic, Turkish, German,
Catalan and Basque.109 The Portuguese playwright Gil Vicente wrote his
plays in Spanish as well as in his native language, and introduced characters
speaking French and Italian.110
105 Halina Lewicka, ‘Le melange des langues dans l’ancien theatre du Midi de la France’, Melanges Jean
Bouti'ere, 2 vols. (Lifcge, 1971), vol. 1, pp. 347~59-
106 Ivano Paccagnella, Ilfasto delle lingue: plurilinguismo lettemrio nel ’500 (Rome, 1984).
107 Giorgio Padoan, La commedia rinascimentale veneta (Vicenza, 1982), pp. 154—83, at pp. 158-9,165.
108 Bakhtin, ‘Prehistory’, p. 82; Folena, ‘L’italiano’, pp. 364-6.
109 Elvezio Canonico-de Rochemonteix, Elpoliglotismo en el teatro de Lope de Vega (Kassel, 1991).
110 Paul Teyssier, La langue de Gil Vicente (Paris, 1959), pp. 230—54.

## 136
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
In Denmark, sixteenth-century comedies such as Kort Vending (1570)
by Hans Christensen Sten, included soldiers speaking Low German mixed
with some High German and Danish."1 An opera for the king’s birth¬
day in 1699 included Cupid singing in Italian, Diana in French, Mars in
High German, Mercury in Low German, and Neptune in Danish.112 In
Russia, the multilingual comedy arrived in the mid-eighteenth century.
Denis Ivanovich Fonvizin’s The Brigadier (1766) represents an official, the
Councillor, who speaks a mix of chancery Russian and Church Slavonic,
while the Brigadier’s son, the fop Ivanushka, laces his Russian with French
phrases such as je vousprie or vous avez raison, enabling Fonvizin to satirize
Westernization while himself borrowing from the West (he was inspired by
the Italian commedia dell’arte)M
Rome was of course a major centre of linguistic encounters which left
their mark on literature. The polyglossia of the city was exploited to partic¬
ularly good effect in the Tinelaria, a play by the emigre Spaniard Bartolome
de Torres Naharro, performed before pope Leo X, published in 1517 and
set in the servant’s hall (tinello). Six main languages, all romance, are spo¬
ken on stage. The chef is a Frenchman, ‘Metreianes’ (Maitre Jean), and his
staff consists of an Italian, a Portuguese, a Valencian, a Basque (who speaks
Castilian), and a German (who speaks Latin). Since the characters some¬
times try to speak one another’s languages in broken fashion, the result is
not difficult to imagine. ‘No meat for me, by God', in the mouth of the
German, becomes Nite cameyo, bi Got."4 Incidentally, the play offers good
evidence of the capacity of the audience to understand varieties of romance
language as if they were so many dialects of Latin. They would have had
no problem making sense of Salvatore.
A similar point might be made about the readers of or listeners to the
sonnets of the period that were written in two or three romance languages
(like some medieval poems). On the marriage of the Duke of Savoy with
a Spanish infanta, Lope de Vega, for instance, produced a sonnet in Latin,
Spanish and Italian.
Sit, o same Himenee, haec dies clara
Eas bellas Ninphas, en alegre coro
Omen le tempie con ghirlande di oro
A1 dulce esposo y a su esposa cara."5
Winge, Ddnische Deutsche, pp. 125-6, 222-3. 1,2 Skautrup, Dauske sprog, p. 305.
113 Denis I. Fonvizin, Dramatic Works (Bern, 1974), pp. 49-86.
Bartolomd de Torres Naharro, Obra Completa (Madrid, 1994), pp. 337-410.
115 Otto Jiirdcr, Die Forme des Sonetts bei Lope de Vega (Halle, 1936), pp. 239—67.

Mixing languages 137
In similar fashion, the southern French poet Du Bartas welcomed
Catherine de’Medici to Nerac with a dialogue between three nymphs, one
of whom spoke Latin, another French and a third Gascon.11*5
Private letters may be located on the frontier of literature and everyday
life. Some people wrote letters in foreign languages but switched to their
native tongue from time to time, perhaps because they could not easily find
the phrase they wanted. The emperor Leopold I, for instance, used Italian to
write to Graf Humprecht Jan Cernin, but from time to time slipped into
German. For instance, when Leopold wanted to say ‘I expect him to return
here within a few days and will tell him what I think’, he wrote I’attendo
qui fra pochi giorno di ritorno und will ihm die meinung sagen.117
The letters of two polyglot composers offer particularly fine examples
of code-switching and code-mixing, thanks perhaps to the well-tuned ears
of the writers. The letters of Mozart, written in a mix of Italian, French,
Latin and different dialects of German, have been described as a sort of
‘linguistic concerto’, a marvellous example of‘linguistic polyphony’.118
An even more remarkable example of language mixing, two hundred
years before Mozart, comes from the letters of the musician Roland de
Lassus, otherwise known as Orlando di Lasso. Lasso was a francophone
from Mons, who had lived in Italy before entering the service of Wilhelm
Duke of Bavaria. He wrote French chansons, Italian madrigals, German
Lieder and Latin hymns with apparently equal ease. He was on intimate
though deferential terms with his young patron (the duke was in his twenties
at the time), playing the role of a court fool (poltrone is his own term).
Forty-eight letters from Lasso to the duke survive from the period 1572-
9, written in a wonderful mix of languages, mainly French, Latin (liturgical
in flavour), Italian (with traces of Venetian) and German, spiced with puns,
deliberate mistakes and a few words of Spanish. They represent a form of
clowning, an extension into the domain of the private letter of the polyglot
comedy, the commedia dell’arteWixh which Lasso was associated at the court.
Like a sophisticated Salvatore, Lasso mixes languages within sentences and
occasionally within a single word, as in the case of a term of his invention,
tregrandissamente.
Here is a passage describing Lasso’s return to Munich, dog-tired {lasso),
but finding his family in good health and joining with him in kissing his
master’s hands. ‘Cum adiutorium altissimi, siamo arrivati a Monaco pero
tanto lassi e strachi quanto mi sia mai ritrovato in diebus vite mee . . . ma
116 Philippe Gardy, La legon de Nerac (Bordeaux, 1999).
117 Leopold I, Korrespondence, ed. ZdenSk Kalista (Prague, 1936), p. 96.
118 Folena, ‘L’italiano’, p. 434.

## 138
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
femme, mon petit guillaume, se portent Zimlich wol got sei lob, et tres
humblement baisons tous la main de votre Excellence’.1'9
## LINGUISTIC EXCHANGES
A remarkable collective achievement of this period was the increase in
European knowledge of non-European languages revealed by the many
grammars and dictionaries published in the period.'20 1 his was also a time
of increasing linguistic contacts within Europe, revealed by similar sources.
However, in the case of the languages of Europe, the increased concern to
teach modern languages should probably be viewed not as a simple result
ol increasing interest in the neighbours but rather as an attempt to find a
substitute for Latin as its use declined.
Within Europe, the vernaculars were enriched by borrowing from one
another as well as from Latin. The Italians, for instance, borrowed 661 words
from French between 1650 and 1715, in the domains of clothes, furniture,
politics and diplomacy in particular. They also borrowed heavily from
Spanish at this time.121 For their part, the French borrowed over seventeen
hundred words from other vernaculars between 1400 and 1800, with the
trend reaching its peak in the sixteenth century (595 loanwords). Loans
diminished only slightly in the seventeenth century (549 words).122 The
new French expressions were taken above all from Italian (688 words), 462
of them in the sixteenth and 203 in the seventeenth century.123 There were
242 words taken from Spanish, especially in the seventeenth century (116),
many of them refer to the fauna, flora and customs of the Americas.114
There were 221 words taken from English, especially in the eighteenth
century. As one scholar has noted, this amount of borrowing ‘does not quite
match up to accepted notions about seventeenth-century French linguistic
nationalism’.125
English has been studied in particular detail from this point of view.
The sixteenth century marked an important phase in the construction of
"9 Orlando di Lasso, Briefe, ed. Horst Leuchtmann (Wiesbaden, 1977), no. 16.
120 W. Keith Percival, ‘La connaissance des langues du monde’, in Sylvain Auroux (ed.), Histoire des
idees linguistiques, 2 vols. (Li£ge, 1989—92), vol. 11, pp. 226-38.
121 Thomas E. Hope, Lexical Borrowing in the Romance Languages, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1971), p. 346;
Beccaria; Spagnolo-, Andrea Dardi, Dallaprovincia all'Europa: I'influsso delfrancese sull’italiano tra il
i6$o e il 171s (Florence, 1992), pp. 39-46, 51.
122 Brunot, Languefranfaise, Pierre Guiraud, Les mots etrangers (Paris, 1965), p. 6.
123 Bartina H. Wind, Les mots italiens introduits eti franfais au i6esiecle (Deventer, 1926), corrected by
## Hope, Borrowing.
124 Hope, Borrowing, p. 32211.
125 Hope, Borrowing, p. 323.

Mixing languages 139
a cosmopolitan vocabulary.126 The ‘amazing hospitality’ of early modern
English to foreign words has often been noted.127 A study of a 2 per cent
sample of the Oxford English Dictionary shows nearly two thousand new
words coming into use between 1500 and 1700. About four hundred of
these were derived from Latin, but 120 came from French, 16 from Italian
and 16 from Spanish.128
If we describe English as ‘hospitable’ to foreign words, it is difficult to
say what adjective should be used about German. The Germans borrowed
about nine hundred Italian words between 1350 and 1600, more than half
of these in the sixteenth century and especially in the domains of commerce
and seafaring.129 However, this total is far surpassed by the more than two
thousand French words that Germans adopted in just over a hundred and
fifty years, or to be more precise between 1575 and 1735.130
The chronology of the borrowing process brings us back to the ideas of
Mikhail Bakhtin, mentioned earlier in this chapter. Bakhtin argued that
it was in the sixteenth century that ‘this inter-animation of languages . . .
reached its highest point’. In the course of the interaction between Latin
and the vernacular, in particular, ‘each became more aware of itself, of
its potentialities and limitations’.131 Bakhtin does not say what happened
after 1600, but he seems to have believed that heteroglossia declined in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, to revive in the age of the classic
European novel.
The great value of this idea of inter-animation is that it links lexical
borrowing and macaronic literature to the praises of particular vernaculars
(above, p. 65) and even, perhaps, to the codification of language on the
model of Latin and Italian, although this codification discouraged further
borrowing and mixing. As for the chronology, the suggestion that the six¬
teenth century was the high point of inter-animation is supported by many
examples already quoted in this chapter, from macaronic Latin and Italian
dialect comedy to Rabelais and his translator Fischart, not forgetting the
letters of Lassus, which Bakhtin would surely have enjoyed had he known
about them.
116 Richard Wermser, Statistische Studien zur Entwicklung des englischen Wortschatzes (Bern, 1976),
pp. 59-61.
127 Robert W. Burchfield, The English Language (Oxford, 1985), p. 25.
128 Charles L. Barber, Early Modern English (Cambridge, 1976), pp. 166-95; on French, Brunot, Langue
frangaise, pp. 208-14, 232-6.
## 129 Wis, Italianismi.
130 Calculated from the dictionaries in Jones, Lexicon, and Brunt, Influence, totalling over 2,500 but
with a considerable overlap between the two studies.
131 Bakhtin, Rabelais, pp. 81-2; cf. Gary S. Morson and Caryl Emerson, Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation of
a Prosaics (Stanford, 1990), pp. 139-45.

## 140
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
However, the process of inter-animation did not come to an end in 1600.
When multilingual plays ceased to be popular, in the early seventeenth cen¬
tury, they were succeeded by comedies displaying the varieties of speaking
associated with different social groups, as in the case of Moliere or his
equivalents in eighteenth-century Venice and Scandinavia, Carlo Goldoni
and Ludvig Holberg (above, pp. 39, 135).
In some languages, as we have seen, lexical borrowing was at its height in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Indeed, another Russian scholar,
Vladimir Vinogradov, referred to what he called the ‘crisis’ of Russian in
the seventeenth century, a crisis that was due to the ‘collision’ between the
Slavonic and Western European languages. What is the difference between
‘interanimation’ and ‘collision’? Why did seventeenth-century Russia not
produce a Rabelais? Bakhtin’s theory raises at least as many questions as it
solves.
The English virtuoso John Evelyn approved of many of the words that
were entering English in his day from Italian or French. Giving the old
metaphor of words as immigrants a new twist, he suggested that his compa¬
triots ‘make as many of these do homage as are like to prove good citizens’.'32
However, Evelyn’s open attitude was not shared by everyone. Indeed, the
seventeenth century was the time that European movements for linguistic
purification really gathered force. These centripetal movements, a reaction
against the centrifugal tendencies we have been discussing, are the topic of
the following chapter.
132 Quoted in Manfred Gorlach, Introduction to Early Modem English (1978: English translation,
Cambridge, 1991), p. 256.

## CHAPTER 6
Purifying languages
One reason for believing that the mixing of languages was increasing in
the early modern period comes from the vehemence of the reaction against
such mixing. Scholarly discussions of the movements for linguistic purity
of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries are relatively common. Some of
these movements were nationalist, like the Greek and the German crusades
against foreign words (below, p. 169). Others were essentially literary, efforts
by poets such as Stephane Mallarme ‘to purify the dialect of the tribe’ as
he put it {dormer un sens plus pur au mots de la tribu). Mallarme dreamed
of an ideal world described in an ideal language.1
Although they have attracted much less scholarly attention, movements
of linguistic purification in early modern Europe were neither uncommon
nor unimportant. They were the negative side of the standardization and
codification of language described in chapter 4. Attempts to make the ver¬
naculars more uniform and more dignified entailed rejecting many words
and certain forms of syntax and pronunciation.
At least three different kinds of purity were advocated. Language had
to be morally pure, as opposed to ‘talking dirty’: the Dictionary of the
French Academy excluded what the preface called ‘swearwords or those
which offend modesty’ {termes d’emportement ou qui blessent la pudeur).
Language also had to be socially pure, in other words to follow the usage
of the upper classes. For this reason the Academy’s dictionary normally
excluded the technical terms used by craftsmen, sending readers in search
of explanations of these terms to a special dictionary compiled by Thomas
Corneille. Finally, language had to be what might be described today as
‘ethnically’ pure, employing native expressions in the place of foreign ones.
It is this third form of purity that will be the main focus of attention in the
following pages.
1 On linguistic purism in general, see Bjorn Jernudd and Michael Shapiro (eds.), The Politics of Language
Purism (Berlin, 1989); George Thomas, Linguistic Purism (London, 1991).

## 142
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
## CAMPAIGNS FOR PURITY
Before focusing on language, it may be illuminating to take a broader
view and discuss contemporary conceptions of purity and campaigns for
purification in a more general way. A concern with purity is to be found in
many domains in early modern Europe — one is tempted to say, everywhere
except in the literal sense of hygiene. When plague struck Cambridge in the
early seventeenth century, the Master of Emmanuel, Lawrence Chaderton,
declared that ‘it is not the clean keeping and sweeping of our houses and
streets that can drive away this fearful messenger of God’s wrath, but the
purging and sweeping of our consciences’.1 2 3
Baths were rare in early modern Europe, and they were becoming rarer
as the public bath-houses of the later Middle Ages were closed down as
morally dangerous. The luxurious bathrooms in the Vatican decorated by
Raphael went out ofuse during the Counter-Reformation. Philip II ofSpain
forbade his subjects to take regular baths, which he interpreted as a symbol
of Muslim sympathies (he may well have been correct in his interpretation).
The Dutch stood out from the rest of Europe by their concern for clean
streets and houses, noted with surprise by one foreign visitor after another.’
No wonder then that India seemed a strange place to European visitors,
who commented on the frequency of baths there.
The principal domain in which a concern with purity was visible in
this period was that of religion. Erasmus wrote a treatise on the purity
of the Church, De puritate ecclesiae. Luther spoke and wrote about the
‘pure gospel’. The Dutch Anabaptist Menno Simons dreamed of a pure
community ‘without spot or stain’.4 Calvinist iconoclasm was justified in
France by the desire ‘to see the Christian religion in its original purity and
whiteness’ (de voir la religion chretienne en sapurete et blancheurpremiere).5
On the other side, Catholics viewed heresy as a kind of poison or disease.
A good deal of the violence of the religious wars of the sixteenth century in
France and elsewhere was justified, if not motivated, by the need to purify
society from this infection. Officially, heretics were burned, in other words
1 On hygiene in this period, Georges Vigarello, Concepts of Cleanliness (1985: English translation,
## Cambridge, 1988).
3 Simon Schama, Ihe Embarrassment of Riches (London, 1987).
4 Quoted in Guido Marnef, Antwerp in the Age of Reformation: Underground Protestantism in a Com¬
mercial Metropolis isso-77 (Baltimore, 1996), p. 73.
s Jean-Loys Micqueau (1564), quoted in Olivier Christin, Une revolution symboliijue (Paris, 1991), p. 64.
Cf. Solangc Deyon and Alain Lottin, l.es casseurs de I’he i$66 (Paris, 1981), pp. 147—64.
h Janine Estehe, Tocsin pour tin massacre (Paris, 1968); Natalie Z. Davis, ‘The Rites of Violence’, (1971:
repr. in her Society and Culture in Early Modern France, Stanford, 1975, pp. 152-88); Denis Crouzet,
Lesguerriers de Dieu, 2 vols. (Paris, 1990).

Purifying languages 143
purified by fire. Unofficially, they were often drowned, or purified by water.
Witches, who were sometimes viewed as a kind of heretic, were also killed
in both these ways.
The ideal of a pure society may also be illustrated by a variety of secular
examples. In Spain, the concern with ‘purity of blood’ (limpieza de sangre)
was becoming more acute in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.7 In
this case pure blood was ‘old Christian’ blood, uncontaminated by that
of Jews or Muslims. Another common idea in this period was that noble
blood was more pure than that of commoners.8
When plague struck a region, as it so often did in early modern Europe,
the attempts to purify the city or village concerned - including disinfection
with sulphur and perfumes, burning clothes and the contents of houses,
washing and quarantine (in other words, the segregation of the unclean) —
were as much symbolic acts as examples of hygiene. The example of the
Italian city of Pistoia in 1630 makes this symbolic element particularly clear.
To fight the plague, the municipal government decreed the expulsion of
foreigners, mountebanks and Jews.9
At a more everyday level, the preoccupation with purity may be illustrated
by the idea of the so-called ‘infamous occupations’, described as ‘dirty’ and
generally located on the periphery of cities. In the case of dyers, for instance,
this regulation appears to be utilitarian, but in the case of executioners, it
was surely symbolic.10 In Bologna, a law of 1564 which mentioned both
cleaning streets and driving away vagabonds implies, so it was recently
suggested, ‘a revealing association between physical dirt and social dirt’.11
In the political sphere too there was a concern with purity, as a further
three examples may suggest. After the revolt of the fisherman Masaniello
against the Spanish regime in Naples in 1647-8, exorcism was considered
to be necessary in order to purify the city from the taint of rebellion.12
In England at much the same time, Colonel Pride carried out his ‘purge’
of the House of Commons, perhaps the first of many political purges.13
During the French Revolution, the expulsion of twenty-two Girondins
7 Albert A. Sicroff, Les controverses des statuts de ‘purete de sang' en Espagne aux i6e et i/e siecles (Paris,
i960).
8 Andr6 Devyver, Le sang epure (Brussels, 1973); Arlette Jouanna, L 'idee de race en France, 1498-1614
(Paris, 1976).
9 Carlo Cipolla, Fighting the Plague in Seventeenth-Century Italy (Madison, 1981), p. 53. Cf. Colin
Jones, ‘Plague and its Metaphors in Early Modern France’, Representations 53 (1996), pp. 97-127.
10 Werner Danckert, Unehrlich Leute (Munich, 1963); Anton Blok, ‘Infamous Occupations’ (1981:
English translation in Honour and Violence, Cambridge, 2001), pp. 44—68.
11 Ercole Sori, La cittd e i rijiuti (Bologna, 2001), pp. 164-5.
12 Peter Burke, ‘The Virgin of the Carmine and the Revolt of Masaniello’ (1983: repr. in Historical
Anthropology of Early Modem Europe, Cambridge, 1987), pp. 191—206, at p. 206.
13 David Underdown, Pride’s Purge: Politics in the Puritan Revolution (Oxford, 1971).

144 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
from the Convention on 15 April 1793 was followed by the declaration that
‘the majority of the convention is pure’.
## PURIFYING LATIN
It is time to move from the language of purity to the purity of language.
The humanists of the Renaissance were extremely interested in the purity
of the ancient languages, especially Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Hebrew was
described by Conrad Gesner as the only pure language. The decline of
pure or Attic’ Greek into impure, Asiatic’ or Hellenistic Greek as a result
of contact with other languages was studied by some humanists, notably
Claude de Saumaise (above, p. 20).14
It was Latin that was most often discussed from this point of view.
Ancient Romans such as Cicero had already defended what they called
a pure, plain or clear form of the language against more elaborate and
obscure varieties. Cicero had compared Latin to those women who are
most beautiful when unadorned. Quintilian, a leading writer on oratory,
had objected to the invasion of Latin by Greek and Carthaginian words.h
Following these models, a number of Renaissance humanists defended the
purity of classical Latin against threats which Cicero and Quintilian could
scarcely have imagined.
The humanist historians of Latin, discussed earlier in this book
(above, p. 20) both described and lamented the loss of purity in Latin,
dating this loss as early as the first century ad, noting the rise of provin¬
cial barbarisms and other offences against what one seventeenth-century
scholar called mundities sermonis — because he had doubts about the purity
of the term puritas itself.16
If first-century Latin could be described as barbarous, it is easy to imagine
how Italian humanists reacted to medieval Latin, which they rejected as
smelling of the kitchen (above, p. 120), and as impure. Leonardo Bruni,
for instance, declared that the purity of Latin should be preserved and not
defiled by Greek or barbarous diction.'7 Pietro Corsi wrote about polluted’
Latin (inquinata Latinitas). The case for and against purism was neatly
summed up in an early dialogue by Claudio Tolomei, in which the lawyer
Giasone del Maino defended the use of technical terms while the humanist
poet Poliziano attacked them.'8 Pietro Bembo claimed in 1525 that Latin
14 Simon Swain, Hellenism and Empire: Language, Classicism and Power in the Greek World, ad 50—250
(Oxford, 1996), pp. 1-64.
15 Quintilian, De Oratore (Cambridge, MA, 2001), book i, chapter 5, section 55.
t(' Gerard Jan Voss, De vitiis sermonis (Amsterdam, 1645).
17 Leonardo Bruni, Epistolae, ed. Lorenzo Mehus (Florence, 1741), book 10, no. 24.
1,1 Claudio Tolomei, De corruptis verbis (Siena, c. 1516).

Purifying languages 145
had recovered its splendour because it had been ‘purified from the rust of
the unlearned centuries’ {purgat a dalla rugine degl’indotti secoli).19 Tolomei,
less optimistic, declared in 1555 that modern Latin still had to regain ‘the
brightness, the purity ... of the language of the Romans’ (il candore, la
purita ... de la romana lingua).10
Outside Italy these arguments were repeated. The German Johann
Reuchlin spoke of ‘the purity of the language’ (puritas linguae). The
Portuguese Arias Barbosa wrote of ‘the brightness [or whiteness] of the
Roman language’ (Romanae linguae candor). The Englishman John Colet,
the founder of St Paul’s school, required the choice of a headmaster who
was learned in ‘the good and clean Latin literature’.21 In this case it is not
clear whether Colet was thinking of moral purity, excluding Plautus, say, or
Catullus from the curriculum, or of purity of language, excluding medieval
authors.
For some of these humanists, notably Bembo, writing pure Latin meant
more than abandoning medieval conventions and trying to emulate the
manner of the Romans of the late Republic. It meant writing in the style of
one individual, Cicero. The humanists Christophe de Longueil and Etienne
Dolet offer extreme and explicit examples of this tendency - Longueil was
said to refuse to use any Latin word that could not be proved to have been
used by Cicero - but in a milder form the tendency was widespread among
the humanists of the sixteenth century.
Turning to the vernacular, it may be useful to distinguish two forms
of purism. The first tendency may be described either as ‘transformative
purism’, since it emphasized change, or as ‘separatism’, since one aim of the
purists was to set themselves apart from other people. The second tendency
may be described as ‘defensive’ purism because it attempted to preserve a
status quo that the purists considered to be under threat.
## STANDARDIZATION AS PURIFICATION
The first form of purism is none other than the standardization discussed
in chapter 4. The point to be made here is that some leading standardizers
viewed their task as one of purifying the language.
In Italy, Bembo declared that his stylistic ideal was always to follow ‘the
purest, cleanest and clearest’ {le piu pure, le piu monde, le piii chiare). He
thought that writers should avoid low subjects so as not to ‘stain’ (macchiar)
19 Bembo, Prose della vulgar lingua (1525: repr. Bembo, Prose e rime, ed. Carlo Dionisotti, Turin, i960,
pp. 71-309).
20 Claudio Tolomei, II Cesano (1546: ed. M. R. Franco Subri, Rome, 1975, p. 37).
21 Johann Reuchlin, De rudimentis hebraicis (Pforzheim, 1506).

146 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
the text. His choice of an archaic standard, that of the fourteenth century,
followed a recurrent strategy of purists.22 The Crusca, a Florentine language
academy founded to support Bembo’s ideals, took its name from a metaphor
of purification, since its aim was to separate the wheat from the ‘chaff
{crusca). The ideal spread to other cities in the seventeenth century. The
English virtuoso John Evelyn noted in the course of his travels in Italy that
‘the purity of the Italian tongue’ was ‘daily improved’ by the efforts of the
Roman academy of the Umoristi.23
In seven tee nth-century France, the poet Francois de Malherbe carried
on the tradition of Bembo with the motto ‘aimez la purete’. Even on his
deathbed he was supposed to have declared that his aim was ‘maintenir la
purete de la langue fran^aise’. Malherbe’s successor as arbiter of French,
Claude de Vaugelas, also stressed the need both to speak and to write
purement. The Academie Fran9aise followed the Florentine model and its
function was described as ‘to clean the tongue from dirt’ {nettoyer la langue
des ordures). The preface to its famous Dictionary (1694) stated its aim as to
give the French language the opportunity ‘to maintain its purity’ {conserver
sa purete) D To view standardization in terms of purity makes it easier to
understand the role in the movement of ladies, especially the so-called
precieuses (above, p. 35).
In England, attempts to purify the language in this way came later and
the movement was weaker than in France. Daniel Defoe’s project for a
language academy was intended to help ‘establish purity and propriety of
style’.25 Samuel Johnson’s famous Dictionary was part of a larger enterprise
to preserve the ‘purity’ of English, which Johnson considered to have been
under threat since the Restoration of Charles II in 1660.26 In arguing in
favour of the Copenhagen standard for Danish, Henrik Gerner described
it as ‘the best form of speech, purified from all dialects (det beste Sprock,
rensed fra alle Dialecten)}1
## DEFENSIVE PURISM, RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION
In a famous book, the British anthropologist Mary Douglas studied ideas of
purity and dirt as parts of symbolic systems, and purification as a response
22 Bembo, Prose della vulgar lingua, pp. 71-309.
23 John Evelyn, Diary, ed. Esmond S. De Beer, 6 vols. (Oxford, 1955), vol. n, p. 364.
14 Alexis Franfois, La grarnmaire du purisme et lAcademie Franfaise au tSesiecle (Paris, 1905).
25 Daniel Defoe, An Essay upon Projects (1697: repr. Menston, 1969), pp. 227—59.
26 Samuel Johnson, Plan of a Dictionary (London, 1747), p. 32.
27 Quoted in Skautrup, Danske sprog, vol. 11, p. 316.

Purifying languages 147
to perceived danger, especially the danger to the cultural order posed by
crossing its boundaries.28 Although she did not have much to say about lan¬
guage, her ideas are extremely relevant to defensive purism in that domain,
explaining the violence of some contemporary reactions to what was per¬
ceived as the invasion of the culture by foreign words, words that came
from the other side of the frontier.
In the case of early modern Europe, there is much evidence for an ‘anxiety
of contamination’, the complementary opposite to the ‘anxiety of defecif
discussed earlier (p. 17). Indeed, the strength of the reaction makes it appro¬
priate to borrow a term from contemporary sociology and speak of a ‘moral
panic’, or at least a cultural one. In the age of the Renaissance, it was Ital¬
ian words that seemed to pose the greatest threat. The reaction of the
purists may be illustrated from the work of the French scholar-printer
Henri Estienne. The positive side of Estienne’s interest in the vernacular,
his praise of the French language and his comparison between modern
French and ancient Greek, has already been discussed (above, p. 68).
The negative side, Estienne’s critique of what he called the ‘italianization’
of French, emerges in the two dialogues he published in 1578, Deux dialogues
du nouveau langage frangois, Italianize et autrement desguise, principalement
entre les courtisans de ce temps. The speakers in these dialogues comment on
and condemn a number of linguistic ‘novelties’ or courtisanismes. Instead
of se promener, for instance, the courtiers say spaceger, in imitation of the
Italian passeggiare. The route they take is not the normal chemin but the
strade, derived from the Italian strada. The conversations they have as they
walk are described not as converser but as ragionner, following the Italian
ragionare, and so on. These attempts to be elegant (leggiadres, from the Ital¬
ian leggiadro) are condemned by the speakers in the dialogue as barbarismes,
barragouinage (pidgin), langage farragineux (a confused mixture or far¬
rago), or, in verse this time, as ‘ce jergon si sauvage/appele courtisan
langage’.29
So far as the facts were concerned, Estienne may have exaggerated for
dramatic effect, since some of his examples are recorded for the first or
only time in the dialogue itself. So is the term italianize in his title, as if
this enemy of neologisms was irritated into perpetrating some of his own.
All the same, Estienne was essentially correct in the sense that however
the courtiers spoke, a considerable number of Italian words were entering
French at this time, just as they were entering English, German and other
28 Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger (London, 1966).
29 Henri Estienne, Deux dialogues (1578: ed. Pauline M. Smith, Geneva, 1980). In the original Latin
farrago meant a mixed fodder given to cattle.

## 148
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
European languages, especially in the military domain (above, p. 129), and
in that of art and architecture.
What some contemporaries considered to be an enrichment of the lan¬
guage was viewed by Estienne as corruption. Like some German writers of
the seventeenth century, what worried him was not so much the rise of new
technical terms in specific domains as the invasion of ordinary language by
words from abroad. If new words there had to be, according to Estienne, it
was best to coin what he called mots composez, in other words compounds
of existing terms, a technique well-known in the Germanic languages but
less often advocated for French.30
Defensive purism was not confined to France at this time, even if
Estienne’s highly articulate presentation of the case was exceptional. Some
writers went further than he did — for it may be useful to distinguish a
mild purism, opposed to recent neologisms, from a more radical variety
that aimed at rooting out even old words with a foreign origin.
A certain Jan van de Werve, for instance, condemned the corruption of
Dutch by romance words in his Tresoor der Duitsche Tale (1553). At that
point he seems not to have noticed that the word tresoor was itself derived
from the French tresor, an omission he put right in the second edition
of his book, when the title was changed to the Germanic Schat. Hendrik
Spiegel argued against the use of French expressions such as bon jour in
Dutch and against words of Latin origin such as conscientie, disputatie or
inventie, and suggested that if borrowing had to take place at all, it should
be from Germanic languages such as Danish, Frisian or English.31 Again,
the mathematician Simon Stevin, in his coinages of mathematical and other
technical terms, preferred native compounds to borrowing from abroad;
his word for ‘triangle’, for instance, was driehoek and for ‘logic’, bewysconst,
‘the art of proof. In similar fashion, Spieghel described his dialogue as a
‘speaking between two people’ (twee-spraak). The word ‘philosophy’ was
rendered into Dutch, following the literal Greek meaning of the term, as
‘desire for wisdom’ (wijsbegeerte).}2
German translations of Vitruvius resisted Latin architectural terms in
a way that the French and English, for instance, did not. One sixteenth-
century physician, Laurentius Fries, advocated the ‘germanization’ of med¬
ical terms, while the schoolmaster and pastor Valentin Ickelsamer opposed
30 Henri Estienne, La pricellence du langage franco is (1579: ed. Edmond Huguet, Paris, 1896), p. 165.
31 Hendrik L. Spieghel, Twee-spraak (1584: repr. Groningen, 1913), pp. xiv-xv, lxxxii.
32 I ,ode van den Branden, Met streven naar verheerlijking, zuivering en opbouw van het Nederlands in de
i6de eeuw (Ghent, 1956), pp. 20-5, 72-4, 188-209.

Purifying languages 149
the introduction of foreign words for police (Policey), for example, gout
CPodagra), recipe (Recept) and mayor (Syndicus). The translator Johann
Fischart, whose contribution to the mixing of languages has already been
discussed (above, p. izi) may seem out of place in a discussion of purity. All
the same, among his many neologisms are some compounds that seem
designed to avoid the introduction of foreign-sounding words: Allein-
herrschungtor monarchy’, for instance, or Bilderschnftfor ‘hieroglyphics’.33
In Scandinavia, there was a similar movement, linked to the Reformation.
In Denmark, Christiern Ill’s Bible (above, p. 103) avoided both Latinisms
and Germanisms. In Sweden, the translators of the Gustav Vasa Bible
also avoided Germanisms, while Johan III told his son and successor to
take action ‘so that foreign words would not be mixed into Swedish, but
the language preserved in a pure and incorrupt form’ {ne peregrinae voces
misceretur Sveticae linguae, seduteapura et incorrupta servaretur) .34 However,
it was the Icelanders who placed most emphasis on the purity of their
language — understandably enough, since it is the closest of the Scandinavian
languages to Old Norse.35
In England too there were purists, though not many. The Cambridge pro¬
fessor John Cheke, a Fellow of St John’s College, argued for what he called
a ‘clean and pure’ English, ‘unmixed and unmangled with other tongues’.
In his translation of the Gospels, for instance, Cheke wrote ‘crossed’ not
‘crucified’ and he replaced the traditional term ‘centurion’ by ‘hundreder’.
Thomas Hoby, who studied at St John’s, was a disciple of Cheke, whose
influence underlies Hoby’s translation of Castiglione’s Courtier (1566),
for example his notorious rendering of the key term sprezzatura by the
Germanic ‘recklessness’ rather than - as might have been expected - by the
## Latinate ‘negligence’.36
The influence of Cheke on Thomas Wilson, a student at King’s College
and the author of the Art of Rhetoric (1553), may also be suspected, especially
in Wilson’s attack on ‘inkhorn terms’, in other words latinate English such
as ‘to fatigate your intelligence’ or ‘obtestate your confidence’. Wilson also
criticized what he called ‘outlandish English’ or ‘English italianated’. In
similar fashion the Anglican divine Ralph Lever, the author of The Art of
Reason (1573), and a former St John’s man like Cheke and Hoby, created
what he called ‘compounded terms’ in the Dutch or German manner as
33 Walter E. Spengler, Johann Fischart (Goppingen, 1969), p. 171.
34 Quoted in Johan Loccenius, Historiae Suecanae (Stockholm, 1676), p. 68.
35 Pierre Halleux, ‘Le purisme islandais’, Etudes Germaniques 20 (1965), pp. 417-27.
3<s Peter Burke, The Fortunes of the Courtier (Cambridge, 1995), pp. 7°~7l-

## 150
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
an alternative to borrowing words from abroad. Among his coinages were
‘forespeech’ for preface and ‘witcraft’ for logic.3'
Incidentally, English purists did not agree about the role of Chaucer in
their story, hero or villain. For Peter Betham, a Cambridge don writing in
1543, the poet’s English revealed his ‘endeavour to bring again to his own
cleanness our English tongue’, but for Richard Verstegan in 1605, Chaucer
was ‘a great mingler of English with French’.38
In the Slavonic languages too there were attempts at purification, begin¬
ning with Czech. In the fifteenth century, the reformer Jan Hus already
felt the need to resist German influences and in his Exposition of the Ten
Commandments he coined the term radnice, for instance, for ‘town hall’ to
replace the obviously Germanic ratusa (from Rathaus, ‘council house’), and
advised his readers to call a towel an ubrusec rather than a hantuch.
## THE SEVENTEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES
In Germany the seventeenth century was a time of intense discussion of
this problem. Societies were founded with the purity of the language as
one of their main ideals. The Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft, for instance,
modelled on the Crusca, was founded in 1617.39
The critique of the invasion of German by French words, especially in the
domain of good behaviour {compliment, galant, mode, etc.), was particularly
intense in the middle decades of the century.40 The linguistic campaign was
part of a more general reaction against foreign and especially French cultural
models, from clothes to cuisine, the ‘imitation of the French’ {Nachahmung
der Franzosen) denounced by the philosopher Christian Thomasius.41
Christian Gueintz, a superintendent of schools in Halle and a member
of the Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft, compared the German language to ‘a
pure maiden embraced by foreign tongues’ {eine reine Jungfrau von frem-
den Sprachen enthalten)fz The poet Georg Weckherlin criticized what he
called ‘Welsch-vermischten Sprach', in other words German larded with
Italian.43 Another poet, Johann Rist, published a book on the ‘rescue of
the noble German language’ from fashionable corruptions. Fike Estienne
37 Quoted in Richard F. Jones, Triumph of the English Language (Stanford, 1953), p. 1Z4.
38 Derek Brewer (ed.) Chaucer: the Critical Heritage, vol. 1 (London, 1978), pp. 98-9, 145.
39 Hans Martin Schultz, Die Bestrehungen derSprachgesellschaften desxviiJhtsfir Reinigung der deutschen
Sprache (1888: repr. Leipzig, 1975); Martin Bircher (ed.), Sprachgesellschafien (Hamburg, 1978).
40 Hans Wolff, Der Purismus in der deutschen I iteratur des siebzehnten Jhts (1888: repr. Leipzig, 1975).
41 Christian Thomasius, Von Nachahmung der Franzosen (1687: repr. Stuttgart, 1894).
42 Quoted in Strassncr, Sprachkultur, p. 66.
43 Quoted in Leonard Forster, The Poet's Tongues (Cambridge, 1970), p. 37.

Purifying languages 151
before him, Rist was irritated into coining neologisms such as alamode-
sirende (‘fashionable’) as well as into parodying the mixed German of his
time. Rist’s spokesman, Teutschherz (‘German heart’) recommends native
equivalents for some German words, including technical terms, for example
Obrist instead of Colonel
In similar fashion, the writer Philipp von Zesen coined compound terms
in order to replace foreign imports — in some cases, ironically enough, fol¬
lowing Dutch models. Although he was not opposed to the entry of every
foreign word into the language, Justus Georg Schottel, another member of
the Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft, also created new words out of combi¬
nations of old ones, for example Beweiskunst (‘the art of proof) for ‘logic’.
Leibniz agreed with the principle, though he preferred to render ‘logic’ as
Vernunftkunst, ‘the art of reason’.45
In the eighteenth century, the German campaign against foreign words
was still in progress, a sure sign that it had not been successful. The first
historian of the German language, Egenolff, complained about the entry
into German of ‘a horde of foreign and barbarous words’ {eine Menge
fyemder und barbarischer Worter).46 The Hamburg weekly Der Patriot made
fun of the continuing use of French words and phrase such as maison
de campagne, saison or sejour. Gottsched criticized the ‘language mixers’
(Sprachen-Mischer), comparing Frenchified German with the language of
beggars or Hottentots.47 Like the translators of architectural treatises in
the Renaissance, German chemists rejected international scientific terms
of Greek derivation, such as ‘hydrogen’ and ‘oxygen’, preferring native
compounds, such as ‘water-stuff or ‘sour-stuff (Wasserstoff, Sauerstoff) A8
In the case of other Germanic languages there were similar movements in
a milder form. In his Dutch translation of Descartes, for instance, following
the model of Stevin and others, Jan Glazemaker devised native or native¬
sounding equivalents for the new philosophical terms. A campaign to purify
Danish was mounted by the writer Frederik Horn, author of a ‘defence of
44 Johann Rist, Rettung der edlen Teutschen Hauptsprache (Hamburg, 1642); cf. Richard J. Brunt, ‘The
Reaction against Foreign Borrowings’, in The Influence of the French Language on the German Vocab¬
ulary, 1649-1735 (Berlin 1983), pp. 48-58.
45 L. Seiffel, ‘J. G. Schottelius and the Traditions of German Linguistic Purism’, in Werner Hiillen
(ed.), Historiography of Linguistics (Munster, 1990), pp. 241-61; Manfred Faust, ‘Schottelius’ Concept
of Word Formation’ in Horst Geckeler, et al. (eds.), Logos Semantikos (Berlin, 1981), pp. 359-70.
46 Johan Augustin Egenolff, Historic der Teutschen Sprache (2 vols., Leipzig, 1716-20), preface to vol. 11.
47 Quoted in Eric A. Blackall, The Emergence of German as a Literary Language, 1700-75 (Cambridge,
1959), pp. 85, 94, 95n, 118.
48 Jan Golinski, ‘The Chemical Revolution and the Politics of Language’, Eighteenth Century 33 (1992),
pp. 238-51; Bernadette Bensaud-Vincent and Marco Abbri (eds.), Lavoisier in European Context:
Negotiating a New Language for Chemistry (Canton, MA, 1995).

152 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
the Danish language against the Danes’ (Apologie for det danske Sprog imod
Danske, 1731). There were other critics of French influence on the language,
including the dramatist Holberg.
Some Swedes were also concerned with this issue in the seventeenth
century, the age in which Sweden was a great power and in which much
was made of the supposed descent of the Swedes from the warlike Goths.
The poet Georg Stiernhielm, for instance, recommended archaism, in this
case the borrowing of terms from Old Norse, or from what he called the
‘Swedo-Gothic’ language, ‘pure and undefiled’ {pura et intaminata). How¬
ever, it was only in 1786 that Gustav III founded the Swedish Academy
in order to promote the ‘purity, strength and sublimity’ of Swedish. The
purity of Icelandic was defended by Arngrimur Jonsson in the seventeenth
century and in the eighteenth by the Icelandic Literary Society (founded
1779), whose members bound themselves to reject new words of foreign
origin.49
In England, a few radicals denounced the linguistic aspect of the domi¬
nation of the Anglo-Saxons by the Norman invaders, the ‘Norman Yoke’, as
they called it, arguing for a return to Saxon words. In a pamphlet published
in 1647 under the dramatic title of St Edwards Ghost, a certain John Hare
proposed ‘that our language be cleared of the Norman and French invasion
upon it, by purging it of all words and terms of that descent, supplying it
from the old Saxon and the learned tongues’. Hare argued that ‘our language
was a dialect of the Teutonic’ and that it was ‘most fruitful and copious in
significance and well-sounding roots and primitives’, roots which allow ‘a
Greek-like ramosity of derivations and compositions, beyond the power of
the Latin and her offspring dialects’.50
There was more anxiety about recent foreign invasions and what the
architect John Webb called the ‘Latinizing, Italianizing, Frenchizing’ of
English. Dryden, for instance, expressed his opposition to those who ‘cor¬
rupt our English idiom by mixing it too much with French . Thomas Sprat,
giving a new turn to the old topos linking language to empire, declared
that ‘the purity of speech and greatness of empire have in all countries still
met together’.5' Xenophobia contributed to the campaign against foreign
words. The Laudable Association of Anti-Gallicans, founded by London
49 Halleux, ‘purisme’, pp. 418-9.
50 John Hare, St Edwards Ghost: or; Anti-Normanisme (London, 1647), p. 10; cf. Jones, Triumph,
pp. 221-2, 228, 249.
51 John Webb, An Historical Essay Endeavouring a Probability that the Language of the Empire of China
is the Primitive Language (London, 1669); Dryden quoted in Manfred Gorlach, Introduction to Early
Modern English (1978: English translation, Cambridge, 1991), p. 253; Sprat quoted in Hermann M.
Flasdieck, Der Gedanke einer englischen Sprachakademie (Jena, 1928), p. 37.

Purifying languages 153
tradesmen in 1745, included in its remit a campaign against the use of
French phrases in English.52
By the later seventeenth century, Italians too were worried about the
Frenchification of their language. The Neapolitan scholar Gianvicenzo
Gravina, for example, used the term ‘pollute’ (inquinari) to refer to the entry
into Italian of foreign words, especially French ones.53 Among the French
words and phrases that arrived in the last thirty years of the seventeenth
century were bello spirito (‘bel esprit ), belmondo (‘beau monde), buonsenso
(‘bon sens’), and civilizzare (‘civiliser’).54 In the eighteenth century, the inva¬
sion continued and the Venetian writer Carlo Gozzi condemned French
for spoiling Italian, deforming it and turning it upside down (he called
it the maggior guastatore, rovesciatore e dijformatore dell’eccellente idioma
nostro).55
Italian, English, German, Danish and Dutch comedies and satires all
mocked the use of French phrases in everyday speech, like the imitation
of French fashions. Fiowever, although Quevedo had spoken in favour of
the purity of Spanish in the seventeenth century, it was not until 1713 that
a Spanish academy was founded on the French model. Paradoxically, the
occasion of this foundation was the need to defend the language against
the invasion of French words.56 In other words, the academy formed part
of the strategy of the Spanish Bourbons, using French methods to defend
themselves against France.
In Bohemia, it was in the later seventeenth century that the grammarian
Vaclav Rosa coined new Czech abstract nouns to replace borrowings from
German. In Polish, Jan Malecki was already complaining in the middle
of the sixteenth century about the excessive use of words from Latin and
German. Of the two, it was the former that posed the main threat, and
satirists such as Krzysztof Opalinski mocked fellow-nobles for speaking
‘macaronically’ (macaronice) and mixing Latin into Polish ‘stupidly and
poorly and inopportunely’. In his Polish dictionary, Gregorz Knapski con¬
demned what he called ‘mixed language’ (mowa mieszona), while a textbook
on rhetoric used in a Jesuit school in Lwow (now L’viv) in 1699 advised
51 Linda Colley, Britons (London, 1995), p. 90.
53 Quoted in Andrea Dardi, Dallaprovincia all’Europa: I’influsso delfrancese sull'italiano tra il 1650 e il
iyiy (Florence, 1992), p. 4on.
54 Dardi, Provincia-, Maurizio Vitale, L'oro nella lingua. Contributiper una storia del tradizionalismo e
delpurismo italiano (Milan-Naples, 1986).
55 Mario Puppo (ed.), Discussioni linguisticbe del ’yoo (Turin, 1957), p. 509.
56 Werner Mulertt, ‘Aus der Geschichte der Spanische Sprachreinigungsbestrebungen’, Estudios Adolfo
Bonilla (Madrid, 1927), vol. 1, pp. 583-603; Dagmar Fries, Limpia, fija y da esplendor: la Real Academia
Espanola ante el uso de la lengua (Madrid, 1989).

## 154
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
readers against the use of foreign words in Polish. The examples against
which pupils were warned included bagatela and sentinela, suggesting that
the greatest threat to the language was now from French.^
In Russian, on the other hand, despite massive borrowing from foreign
languages, there are few signs of purism until the middle of the eighteenth
century. Alexander Sumarakov claimed that ‘the acceptance of foreign words
is not an enrichment but a corruption of the language’, and recommended
‘the expulsion of foreign words’ from Russian, while Mikhaylo Lomonosov
criticized Latinisms, Germanisms and Gallicisms and planned to write on
purity of styled8 As readers of War and Peace will be well aware, these
recommendations had little effect.59
The Ottoman Empire followed similar trends, in its own time. In the
sixteenth century, official documents were written in Persian and Arabic. In
the seventeenth century, in a movement like that of the European Renais¬
sance, the documents were drawn up in a Turkish mixed with Persian and
Arabic words. In the eighteenth century, purists eliminated these foreign
expressions in favour of Turkish ones.60
## ANTI-PURISM
It would be misleading to give the impression either that the purists won
without a struggle or that resistance was purely passive or unconscious.
There is also evidence of anti-purist reactions.
Erasmus, for instance, made fun of Ciceronians such as Bembo in his
dialogue the Ciceronianus (1528). In Italy, too, Bembo was often disobeyed
and sometimes mocked. For example, the writer Pietro Aretino was surely
making fun of Bembo and his chaste language when he presented a discus¬
sion of the best words to use for ‘door’, ‘window’ and so on, in the setting
of a Roman brothel, with purism represented by a whore named after her
catch-phrase ‘Mummy doesn't like it’ (.Matremma non vuole).
57 Maria Renata Mayenowa, ‘Aspects of the Language Question in Poland’, in Picchio and Goldblatt,
Aspects, vol. i, pp. 337-76, at pp. 343, 349, 353; Martel, La langtte polonaise, p. 4611.
Antoine Martel, Michel Lomonosov et la langtte litteraire russe (Paris, 1933), pp. 41-4; Sumarokov
quoted in Hans Rogger, National Consciousness in Eighteenth-Century Russia (Cambridge, MA,
i960), p. 106.
59 Robert Auty, ‘The Role of Purism in the Development of the Slavonic Literary Languages’, Slavic
and East European Review 51 (1973), pp. 335-43; Auty, ‘Czech’, in Alexander M. Schenkerand Edward
Stankiewicz (eds.), The Slavic Literary Languages: Formation and Development (New Haven, 1980),
pp. 163-82, at p. 173; Ccrta Hiittl-Worth, Foreign Words in Russian: A Historical Sketch, isso—1800
(Berkeley, 1963), p. 25.
6,1 1 should like to thank Professor Metin Kunt of Sabanc University for information about Ottoman
## Turkish.

Purifying languages 155
Like Aretino’s dialogue, the lyrics in Venetian dialect by the patrician
Matteo Venier, which name directly what we still euphemistically call our
‘private parts’, express a rebellion against the linguistic standards of Bembo
as well as against the poetry of Petrarch. Again, the publication of the dic¬
tionary of the Crusca was immediately followed by Paolo Beni’s Anticrusca,
a critique of the fourteenth-century Tuscan standard.61
In France, the campaign of Vaugelas and his followers provoked a reac¬
tion on the part of some writers. Among them was the elderly historian
Scipion Dupleix, who attacked ‘the refiners of our language’ and their
‘oracle’ Vaugelas for ‘an affected elegance’ and defended linguistic liberty
against what he called ‘an over-scrupulous purity of style and language’.62
The drama was also used to mock the purists. Before Moliere ridiculed
the precieuses, St-Evremond’s Comedie des academistes (1638) was already
making fun of the newly-founded Academie Franchise. In the next century,
Voltaire joined the ranks of the anti-purists, describing the French language
as ‘a poor beggarwoman who is afraid of charity’ [une indigente orgueilleuse
qui craint qu’on ne lui fasse Vaumone) A3
Aaiother sign of the anti-purist reaction is the rise of the term ‘purist’
itself in different European languages. In France, for instance, the writer
and churchman Jean-Pierre Camus was making critical remarks about the
‘academie des puristes’ even before the French Academy was founded.
The dictionary-maker Furetiere also denounced the puristes. In the case
of German, it was Leibniz who criticized the linguistic ‘Puritans’ as he
called them, with their ‘superstitious fear’ of foreign words that they
avoided as if they were ‘mortal sins’. Leibniz’s views on language were
linked to his interest in science and technology, since he criticized both
the Crusca and the French Academy for their omission of technical terms
from their dictionaries.64 In the case of Danish, the playwright Ludwig
Holberg aimed at what he called a ‘middle way’ between mixers and ‘purists’
{purister) fy
In England, it was only in the eighteenth century that the term ‘purist’
was coined, to refer to ‘one that affects to speak or write neatly and prop¬
erly’.66 In Italy, too, references to the puristi della lingua date from the
eighteenth century, from the circle of Milanese intellectuals centred on the
Sl W. Theodor Elwert, Studi di letteratura veneziana (Venice-Rome, 1958), pp. 163-4; P- B. Diffley, Paolo
Beni: a biographical and critical study (Oxford, 1988), pp. 139—41.
62 Scipion Dupleix, Liberte de la langue frangoise en sapurete (1651: repr. Geneva, 1973), pp. 5,15.
63 Voltaire to Beauzee, 15 January 1768.
64 Strassner, Sprachkultur, p. 105. 65 Skautrup, Danske sprog, vol. ill, p. 50.
66 Phillips (1706), quoted in the Oxford English Dictionary, sub voce ‘purist’.

156 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
journal II Caffe.67 It might be argued that the term was scarcely needed
in Italian, where it was traditional to mock a style that was bembesco or
cruscaio - in other words, one that followed the manner recommended by
the Academia della Crusca (above, p. 146). All the same, the Paduan writer
Melchiorre Cesarotti’s critique of purism deserves to be noted, because it
posed the problem in general terms. Cesarotti denounced the idea ‘that
all languages are closed to encounters, that their greatest quality is purity,
and that any tincture of the foreign makes them bastards and corrupts
them’ (che tutte le lingue siano reciprocamente insociabili, che il loro massimo
pregio sia la purita, che qualunque tintura di peregrinita le imbastardisca e
corrompa) .68
## PURITY AND DANGER
At this point, it may be useful to stand back from the material and try to
explain why there should have been an acute concern with the purity of
language in certain places and at certain times in early modern Europe,
in contrast to the Middle Ages, when the purity of language was not an
issue. Possible explanations are either internal to the history of language or
external to it.
The obvious internal explanation is the one already offered by speaking
of a defensive reaction to language change, especially to the invasion of
certain languages by large numbers of foreign words. What we see is the
defence oi linguistic territory. After all, language is one of the principal
markers of community. As the anthropologist Mary Douglas, cited above,
has suggested, a concern with purity expresses a sense of danger, a perceived
threat to the cohesiveness of the community.69
If this is the case, there should be more concern with purity whenever
there is more borrowing and mixing. The earliest example of a movement
of linguistic purification — at least, the earliest known to me - confirms
this hypothesis, since it comes from the Roman Empire in the Hellenistic
period, when words from Latin and other languages were invading Greek.
This was the time that Herodian the Grammarian described those who
objected to words of foreign origin as hoi kathareuontes, ‘the purists’.70
67 Ferdinando Ncri, ‘Purista’, in his Letteratura e legende (Milan, 1951), pp. 118-22; Maurizio Vitale,
‘Purista e purismo’, Acme 17 (1964), pp. 187-211; Vitale, ‘Discussioni linguistichc del ’700’, in Lia
Formigari (ed.), Teorie epratiche linguisticbe nellltalia del '700 (Bologna, 1984), pp. n—36.
Melchiorre Cesarotti, Saggio sopra la lingua it a liana (1785: repr. in Emilio Bigi (ed.), Dal Muratori
al Cesarotti, Milan and Naples, i960), pp. 304-468, at p. 306.
Douglas, Purity. 70 Quoted in Swain, Hellenism and Empire.

Purifying languages 157
On the edge between internal and external factors, the role of the
printing-press in the creation of linguistic standards has already been noted
(above, p. 106). The increasing number of printed texts available in the
vernacular after 1500 made impurities more dangerous than before, since
the infection could easily spread. It is unlikely to be a coincidence that
one of the leading purists discussed above, Pietro Bembo, worked in close
collaboration with the Venetian printer Aldus Manutius, while Henri Esti-
enne, a printer himself, had also worked with Aldus. Language purifiers
reject forms that do not meet a certain standard and so assume the prior
existence of that standard, d he lack of standard forms of language explains
the absence of movements for linguistic purification in the Middle Ages.
In the case of external explanations, this chapter has already hinted at
possible connections between movements of linguistic purification and
other kinds of purification: religious, political, social and so on. It is time
to investigate these connections a little further.
There is something to say about the politics of language purification
at this time, though less than in the case of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries (below, p. 163). In the case of Italy, Grand Duke Cosimo de’Medici
of Tuscany, a new ruler who needed legitimation, was shrewd enough
to see that he could associate the Tuscan standard with his regime by
founding an academy concerned with language (above, p. 98). To employ
the terminology of Pierre Bourdieu, Cosimo had learned how to transform
cultural capital into political capital.71 In the case of England, the idea of
the ‘Norman Yoke’ in language (above, p. 152), gave the story of language
purification a political twist.
In the case of French, Richelieu’s interest in the Academie Fran^aise
had political as well as cultural roots, although the political motive for the
reform of language surely derived from foreign rather than domestic policy.
Linguistic reform was less an aspect of state-building than an extension of
France’s rivalry with Spain into the speech domain.72 The parallel between
the centralization of government and the rise of formal control over lan¬
guage is of course a tempting one, especially when it is contrasted with
British resistance both to absolute monarchy and a language academy. How¬
ever, to attribute language planning to Richelieu - or to any seventeenth-
century statesman - is surely anachronistic. The shift to an official ‘politique
de la langue’ came with the French Revolution (below, p. 165).73
71 Bourdieu, Distinction-, Sergio Bertelli, ‘L’egemonia linguisticacome egemonia culturale’, Bibliotheque
d’ Humanisme et Renaissance 38 (1976), pp. 249-81.
72 Claude-Gilbert Dubois, Mythe et langage au i6e siecle (Bordeaux, 1970), p. 90.
73 Henri Peyre, La royaute et les langues provinciates (Paris, 1933).

i5«
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
At this time, religious motives were more important than political ones
in the purification of language, a point that may be illustrated from the
examples of two purists already discussed, Henri Estienne and John Cheke.
Both were strong Protestants. Their hostility to Italian and Latin words
was surely linked to their hatred and fear of the Church of Rome, so often
described by reformers in terms of impurity. In the case of the translation of
the Gospels, Cheke’s preference for traditional English equivalents of Greek
words, such as ‘overseer’ for episkopos, expressed his awareness of the way
in which earlier translations, in this case ‘bishop’, had helped legitimate a
form of Church organisation which he rejected. In short, there were links
between purism and Puritanism.
Whether purists belong to a particular psychological type is a fascinating
question. It is tempting to speculate on this topic, to suggest, for exam¬
ple, that their obsession with purity locates them in the group that Freud
classified as ‘anal-retentive’.74 Unfortunately, so far as the early period is
concerned, there is no way of verifying or falsifying the hypothesis. We are
on firmer ground if we offer social explanations for linguistic purification,
beginning from the point already made (above, p. 32), about linguistic sep¬
aration as a sign of social separation. Social factors may also be important
in the emergence of defensive purism. In the search for these factors, it may
be illuminating to pay attention to the metaphors used by contemporaries
when discussing linguistic issues. Two are particularly noteworthy: nobility
and citizenship.
An eighteenth-century Spanish writer once described his criteria for
accepting a new word. If it was ‘of known origin and expressive’ (castiza
y expressiva), then two or three classic authors would be sufficient ‘testi¬
monies to prove its nobility’ (testigos fidedignos para probar sua nobleza).
Thanks to the frequent use of the term castiza (derived from casta, ‘family’),
the language debate in eighteenth-century Spain was described as a battle
between casticistas and afrancescados, ‘the Frenchified’.75
In other words, the legitimation of words is compared to the legitimation
of claims to status, more especially to practices for making claims to nobility
at this time, by investigating the family of the claimant and calling witnesses.
New words are compared to the new rich, outsiders who have to wait to
he accepted by the established. This point leads to the second revealing
metaphor, that of citizenship. As we have seen (above, pp. 19, 140), new or
74 Cf. Andrt* Mirambel, ‘Les aspects psychologies du purisme dans la Grece moderne’, Journal de
Psychologic (1964), pp. 405-36.
75 Quoted in Mulertt, ‘Sprachreinigung’, p. 587; on casticistas, Arnado Alonso, Castellano, espahol,
idioma nacional: historia spiritual de tres nomhres (Buenos Aires, 1938), pp. 121-3.

Purifying languages 159
foreign words were perceived as immigrants, outsiders to the community
and so objects of suspicion, but capable of being ‘naturalized’.
In short, attitudes to language were coloured by social attitudes, not to
say prejudices. Whose prejudices in particular it is not easy to say. As we
have seen, purists ranged from patricians, such as Bembo, to professors,
such as Cheke, merchants, such as Werve, and printers, such as Estienne. If
we may trust the testimony of literature, female purists, from ‘Matremma
non vuole’ to theprecieuses ridicules, were also prominent in the movement.
The Renaissance may have been a great moment of heteroglossia, as
Bakhtin has suggested, but this chapter has suggested that mixing was not
to everyone’s taste at the time. There is a good deal of evidence for what
might be called linguistic xenophobia, though not - so it has been argued -
for linguistic nationalism in the modern sense. The idea that members
of a given nation ought to speak alike was first voiced during the French
Revolution as part of its universalizing policies.76 The international move¬
ment for language purification discussed in this chapter was a movement
by minorities on behalf of minorities.
76 Michel de Certeau, Jacques Revel and Dominique Julia, Une Politique de la langue: la Revolution
Frangaise et lespatois (Paris, 1975).

Epilogue: languages and nations
This book has presented a few central themes in the story of European lang¬
uages from the late-fifteenth to the late-eighteenth century. The choice of
the French Revolution as the moment to end the story implies that in lang¬
uage, as in government, an old regime was replaced by a new one after 1789.
Roughly speaking, this view is correct. From 1789 onwards, governments
in Europe and elsewhere have become increasingly concerned with the
everyday language of ordinary people. The point is that language both
expresses and helps to create national communities. We might say that
language was nationalized’ at this time, or that it became an instrument of
the cult of the nation’. From this time onward, it becomes appropriate to
speak of conscious ‘language policies’.1
To be more precise, though, this view requires a few qualifications. As
so often in history, it is more illuminating to view change in relative terms
than in absolute ones, to speak of more or less rather than of presence
or absence. Cultural regimes are not transformed overnight, or even in a
decade. Changes in the linguistic regime and the idea of the nation were
becoming visible before the Revolution and continuities remained apparent
long after that date. This is the reason for the following epilogue. It does not
aspire to be a general survey of European languages in the last two centuries.
It is simply intended to offer a few explicit comparisons and contrasts
between European languages and their communities before and after 1789.
## LANGUAGES AND NATIONS BEFORE I75O
At first sight, the links between language and nation appear to be very
old. Indeed, they seem to go back to the Middle Ages. It was said that
‘the language makes the people’ (gentem lingua facit). In the later Middle
' I )avid A. Bell, The Cult ofthe Nation (Cambridge, MA, 2001), p. 171; cf. Daniel Baggioni, Langues et
nations en Europe (Paris, 1997), and Anne-Marie Thiesse, La creation des identites nationales: Europe
xviii-xxsiecle (Paris, 1999), esp. pp. 67-82.
## 160

Epilogue: languages and nations 161
Ages, the same word was often used to refer both to language and to the
people who spoke it: lingua in Latin, langue in French, Zung in German,
jazyk in Czech. The recurrent statements that rulers were planning the
destruction of subordinate ‘languages’ (quoted above, p. 16) may express
fears of genocide.2
The Latin word natio was in use in the Middle Ages, meaning much
the same as gens or populus, in other words, ‘people’.3 On occasion, it was
employed in what seems at first sight to be a modern way. Take the case of the
Council of Constance, for example, a council of the Church held between
1414 and 1418. At the Council, an Englishman argued that languages are
'the greatest and most authentic mark of a nation’ {maximum et verissimam
pro bant nationem et ipsius essentiam). He sounds about four hundred years
ahead of his time, but his argument needs to be replaced in its context.
The point was that voting in the Council was not by individuals but by
nations (French, German, Italian, Spanish and English). These were not
nations in the modern sense, for the so-called ‘German’ nation included the
Hungarians, Czechs, Poles, Danes and Swedes. When the French denied
the English claim to be a separate nation, the point about language was
made in its support. It did not refer to the use of English alone, but to the
five languages spoken in the realm, which made the English as worthy as
the Germans to be classified as a nation.4
All the same, the association between a people and its language expressed
by the term lingua is a revealing one. In the later Middle Ages, as some
vernaculars entered the domains of literature and administration, language
was becoming a source of pride, identity and consequently of conflict. If a
people that had previously been independent became part of an empire, it
might be allowed to retain its official language. Hence, in 1527, Ferdinand
of Austria promised those Hungarians who lived in the Habsburg Empire -
the rest were now under the rule of the Turks - that he would preserve ‘your
nation and language’ {nationem et linguam oestrum).5
On the other side, as we have seen, rulers and their advisers might view a
uniform language, at least a uniform administrative language, as a valuable
2 Robert Bartlett, The Making of Europe (1993: second ed., Harmondsworth, 1994), pp. 198-203; cf.
Rees R. Davies, The Peoples of Britain and Ireland 1100-1400: Language and Historical Mythology’,
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 7 (1997), pp. 1-24, at p. 2.
3 Johan Huizinga, ‘Patriotism and Nationalism in European History’ (1940; English translation in Men
and Ideas, New York, 1959), pp. 97-155- at PP- 106-7.
4 Louise R. Loomis, ‘Nationality at the Council of Constance’, American Historical Review 44 (1940),
pp. 508-27.
s Quoted in Leon Dominian, The Frontiers of Language and Nationality in Europe (New York, 1917),
p. 154.

162 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
support for the state, an encouragement to loyalty. In the words of Irenius, a
character in a dialogue by Edmund Spenser - who was engaged at the time
in imposing English rule in Ireland - ‘the speech being Irish the heart must
needs be Irish, for out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaketh'.6
‘Speak that I may see thee’.
In the early seventeenth century, the traveller Fynes Moryson expressed
the view that ‘all nations have thought nothing more powerful to unite
minds than the community of language’. As in the case of the Council of
Constance, Moryson’s observation looks extremely modern. Once again,
this apparent modernity is an illusion. The reference is almost certainly to
language as a bond of realms or empires, rather than of nations in our sense
of the term.7 *
## THE CASE OF SKANE
Another case of apparent modernity, practical rather than theoretical this
time, comes from Sweden. It concerns the policy of the Swedish govern¬
ment in the later seventeenth century, when several provinces which had
formerly been Danish, notably Scania or Skane, were incorporated into
Sweden. The island of Gotland became Swedish in 1645, and Skane in
- At first, cultural traditions were not disrupted. The Danish bishop
of Lund remained in office, apparently feeling that the change, how¬
ever unwelcome, was tolerable because the new ruler, like his predeces¬
sor, was a Lutheran. For twenty years, Danish remained the language of
the churches and the schools.x Fiowever, the so-called ‘Ljungby rescript’
of 1678 issued by King Karl XI ordered that the language of the liturgy in
Skane be changed to Swedish, while schoolchildren would henceforth learn
to read from Swedish Bibles and psalm-books.9
What was the significance of this change ol mind on the part of the
government? In the 1690s, the new policy was applied by a governor-general
6 Edmund Spenser, A View of the Present State of Ireland, ed. William L. Renwick (Oxford, 1970), p. 67.
7 Quoted in Blank, Broken English, p. 126.
B Skautrup, Danske sprogs, vol. 11, pp. 293-7; Stig Ohlsson, Skinessprdkliga forsvenskning (Lund, 1978);
Lars S. Vikor, ‘Northern Europe: Languages as Prime Markers of Ethnic and National Identity’,
in Stephen Barbour and Cathy Carmichael (eds.), Language and Nationalism in Europe (Oxford,
2000), pp. 105-29; Hanne Sanders, Religiost eller nationalt verdensbillede? Skine efter overgangen
til Sverige i 1658 , in Sanders (ed.), Mellem Gud og Djaevalen: Religiose og magiske verdensbillede i
Norden 1500-1800 (Copenhagen, 2001), pp. 231-52.
Harald Gustafsson, 'Act gtira svenskar av danskar? Den svenska integrationspolitikens forestallni-
ngsvarld 1658-93’, in his Da 0stdanmark blev Sydsverige (forthcoming). I should like to thank Prof.
Gustafsson for sending me his chapter before publication. Cf. Jens Lerbom, Mellan tvd riken: Inte¬
gration, Politisk kultur och fornationella identiteterpd Gotland 1500-1700 (Lund, 2003), pp. 130, 235.

Epilogue: languages and nations 163
who saw himself as ‘civilizing’ the people ofSkane by making them Swedish.
All the same, it is likely that the government’s intentions were more prag¬
matic. Political rather than cultural integration was the aim, following the
old principle, quoted more than once in this study, that conquered peo¬
ples should adopt the language of their conquerors (above, pp. 22, 82).10
As a French official declared in 1744, ‘it is inappropriate to use a foreign
language in preference to that of the prince under whose domination one
finds onesell (il est indecent que Von s appliqueplutot a une langue etrangere
qu’a celle duprince sous la domination duquel on se trouve).n
In the case of Skane, the government was for once concerned with the
language of the people and not only with the language of administration. In
similar fashion, the French government was concerned to spread French in
Roussillon (at the expense of Catalan) and Alsace (at the expense of German)
when these provinces became French in the later seventeenth century. Ail
the same, these policies — rare instances of a conscious language policy
from the period before 1789 - were not examples of nationalism in the
modern sense. A number of scholars working on different parts of Europe
have made this point in the last few years, using a variety of substitutes
for the N-word: ‘proto-nationalism’, for instance, ‘linguistic nationalism’,
or ‘regnalism’. My own preference is for ‘statism’, suggesting that a strong
state, rather than a unified nation, was the aim of rulers and their advisers.
During the old regime, according to the French historian Lucien Febvre,
‘the concepts of language and nationality were not linked at all’.12 This
statement, like many of Febvre’s, is a little too strong. However, it is safe
to say that before the year 1750 or thereabouts, the connections between
languages and states were closer than those between languages and nations.
## THE LATER EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
From the middle of the eighteenth century onwards, the links between
language and nation become increasingly close and we find more and more
examples of the idea that ‘one language’ should join the traditional trinity
of‘one king, one faith, one law’ (une roi, une foi, une lot). In 1768, King
Carlos III of Spain decreed that there should be one language and one
currency in his kingdom. In this respect, the history of European languages
confirms the suggestion of the German historian Reinhart Koselleck that
10 Gustafsson, ‘Svenskar’.
11 Argenson quoted in Ignasi Igl6sias, La llengua delRossello, i6sp—i/Sp (Vic, 1998), p. 9.
12 Lucien Febvre, ‘Politique royale ou civilisation franjaise? Remarques sur un probRme d’histoire
linguistique’, Revue de Synthese Historique 38 (1924), pp. 37—53, at p. 31.

164 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
in the history of European ideas, the late eighteenth century was a turning-
point or SattelzeitE We might even speak of a second discovery of lan¬
guage’, focused this time not on variety, as in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, but on unity, and linked to the discovery, or, as some scholars
prefer to say, the ‘invention’ of the nation.'4
Johann Gottfried Herder’s description of a nation as a community held
together by language, especially a spoken language, has become famous, like
his argument that dominant nations have ruled not so much by the sword
as by ‘the use of a more cultivated language’.'5 Johann Gottlieb Fichte went
further in his equally famous assertion that ‘Wherever a separate language
can be found, there is also a separate nation which has the right to manage
its affairs and rule itself’, while Friedrich Schlegel declared that ‘a nation
which allows herself to be deprived of her language . . . ceases to exist’.
Napoleon spoke in the same vein when he told the Hungarians that ‘you
have a national language . . . take up then once again your existence as a
- > l6
nation .
In France, Antoine Rivarol’s discussion of the genius of a specific language
reformulated the humanist discourse on empire and language (above, p. 20)
to declare that ‘languages are like nations’, rising and falling with them.1 It
was in this context that intellectuals discussed the teaching of the vernacular
in French schools.'8
In Italy, Melchiorre Cesarotti declared that ‘the language belongs to the
nation’ {La lingua appartiene alia nazione), while Gianfrancesco Galeani
Napione claimed that ‘Fanguage is one of the strongest ties binding us to
our native country’ {La lingua e uno dei piu forti vincoli che stringe alia
patria). In the case of the Italian peninsula, however, the term patria was
still ambiguous. Ferdinando Galiani claimed to have written his essay on
the Neapolitan dialect out of what he called ‘our love of the fatherland’
{nostro amore alia patria). He was referring to Naples, not to Italy.'9
13 Reinhart Koselleck, Futures Past (1979: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1985).
14 Herv£ Le Bras and Emmanuel Todd, L'invention de la France (Paris, 1981); Murray G. H. Pittock,
The Invention of Scotland (London, 1991); Inman Fox, La invencidn de Espaha (Madrid, 1997).
'! Johann Gottfried Herder, ‘Abhandlung iiber den Ursprung der Sprache’, in Sdmtliche Werke,
ed. Bernard Suphan (Hildesheim, 1877-1913); Michael Townson, Mother-Tongue and Fatherland
(Manchester, 199a), pp. 80-102.
,r> Napoleon quoted in Joshua Fishman, Language in Sociocultural Change (New York, 1972), p. 9.
17 Antoine Rivarol, De I'universalite de la langue fanqaise (1784: ed. T. Suran, Paris, 1930), p. 255.
|K Louis Trenard, ‘L’enseignement de la langue nationale; une reforme pedagogique, 1750—1790’,
Reflexions Historiques 7 (1990), pp. 95-114.
19 Cesarotti, Saggio sopra la lingua italiana, pp. 304-468, at p. 314; Gianfrancesco Galeani Napione,
Dell’uso e dei pregi della lingua italiana (Turin, 1791); Ferdinando Galiani, Del dialetto napoletano
(Naples, 1779).

## 165
Epilogue: languages and nations
In linguistic practice as well as in theory, the later eighteenth cen¬
tury appears to have been a turning-point. In Denmark, for instance,
it seems that the link between language and national consciousness was
forged around the year 1770 in the course of a reaction against a regime in
which a German, Count Struensee, had exercised power. Before this time,
the coexistence of German and Danish appears to have been politically
## ‘unproblematic’.20
In the course of the French Revolution, the ‘politics of language’
came to the fore, especially in 1793, when fear of counter-revolution was
widespread.21 Bertrand Barere, a member of the Committee for Public
Safety, called for a revolution in language, in order to combat ‘federalism
and superstition’ in Brittany and Languedoc, while Henri Gregoire, a priest
who had rallied to the Revolution, was commissioned by the government
to investigate the state of the French language. In his report, presented to
the National Convention in 1794, Gregoire declared the need to destroy
patois and ‘universalize’ the use of French, precisely in order ‘to melt the
citizens into a national mass’ (above, p. 10). This vivid example of the revo¬
lutionaries’ concern with unanimity was also an early instance of language
planning, furnishing a model that many governments would follow in the
nineteenth century.22
There was a similar trend in the New World. In the United States, ten
years after the outbreak of the American Revolution, the dictionary-maker
Noah Webster wrote that ‘a national language is a national tie, and what
country wants it more than America?’23 In Peru, after the defeat of the revolt
of Thupa Amaru, the chair in Quechua, founded at the University of Lima
in the sixteenth century, was abolished, while the governor of Arequipa
20 Vibeke Winge, Ddniscbe Deutsche — deutsche Ddnen. Geschichte der deutschen Sprache in Ddnemark
1300—1800 (Heidelberg, 1992), pp. 9, 312-4.
21 ‘Une politique de la langue’ is the title of chapter 2 of Ferdinand Brunot s Histoire de la langue
frangaise, vol. ix (Paris, 1927), as well as of the book by Certeau cited in the following note.
22 Michel de Certeau, Jacques Revel and Dominique Julia, Une politique de la langue (Paris, 1975);
Jean-Yves Lartichaux, ‘Linguistic Politics during the French Revolution’, Diogenes 97 (1977),
pp. 65-84; Patrice Higonnet, ‘The Politics of Linguistic Terrorism’, Social History 5 (1980), pp. 41-
69; Martyn Lyons, ‘Politics and Patois: the Linguistic Policy of the French Revolution’, Australian
Journal of French Studies (1981), pp. 264-81; Lorenzo Renzi, La politica linguistica della rivoluzione
francese (Naples, 1981); Lynn Hunt, Politics, Culture and Class in the French Revolution (Berkeley,
1984), pp. 19-51; Henri Boyer and Philippe Gardy (eds.), La question linguistique au sudau moment
de la Revolution Frangaise (Montpellier, 1985) [special issue, no. 17, of Lengas]\ Peter Flaherty, ‘The
Politics of Linguistic Uniformity during the French Revolution’, Historical Reflections 14 (1987),
pp. 311-28; David A. Bell, 'Lingua Populi, Lingua Dei: Language, Religion and the Origins of French
Revolutionary Nationalism’, American Historical Review 100 (1995), pp. 1403-37.
23 Allen W. Read, ‘American Projects for an Academy to Regulate Speech’, Publications of the Modern
Language Association 51 (1936), pp. 1141—79, at p. 1146.

## 166
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
advocated the extirpation of indigenous languages, which he viewed as an
obstacle to centralization/4 In the Portugal of the Marquis of Pombal, a
decree of 1757 made Portuguese the official language of Brazil and ordered
the Indians to be taught it. There were also attempts to extirpate indigenous
languages at this time/5
## IMAGINED COMMUNITIES
The intense discussions of the culture of nationalism that have taken place in
the last generation help us to place the nationalization of language in a wider
context. After 1789, we see the increasing importance of the centralized
state, of the national army, of universal education, and of new media of
communication, especially the railway and the newspaper, followed by the
radio, the cinema and the television.
Taken together, these institutions encouraged the creation of what
Benedict Anderson has called the ‘imagined communities’ of the nations.
Anderson sees national languages, spread by what he calls ‘print-capitalism’,
as central to this process of imagining. He has been criticized for ‘Whorfi-
anism’, that is for assuming, like the linguist Benjamin Whorf, that thought
is determined by language, and also for failing to note that ‘homogeneous
language is as much imagined as is community’. A moderate or qualified
version of Anderson’s argument is proof against the first objection, while
the problem of homogeneity will be addressed below/6
National armies raised by conscription, from the French revolution¬
ary levee en masse onwards, contributed to the process of standardizing of
national languages just as international armies of mercenaries had con¬
tributed to the process of language mixing during the Thirty Years War.
The new armies brought together in the barracks recruits from different
regions. The standard vernacular was used lor orders and perhaps as a lingua
franca as well.
Gregoire had dreamed of a primary school in each French commune.
Universal compulsory elementary education was introduced into a number
14 Bruce Mannheim, The Language of the Inka since the European Invasion (Austin, 1991), pp. 74-5.
25 David Brading, The First Americans (Cambridge, 1991), pp. 491-4.
26 Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (1983:
second ed., London, 1991). For criticisms, see Judith Irvine and Susan Gal, ‘Language Ideology and
Linguistic Differentiation’ and Michael Silverstein, ‘Whorfianism and the Linguistic Imagination of
Nationality’, in Paul V. Kroskrity (ed.), Regimes of Language-, ideologies, polities and identities (Santa
Fe and Oxford, 2000), pp. 35-84 and 85-138. Cf. Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (London,
1983) and Eric Hobsbawm, Nations and Nationalism since 1/80: Progress, Myth, Reality (Cambridge,
## 1990).

Epilogue: languages and nations 167
of European countries in the course of the nineteenth century. Unlike the
Latinophone colleges for elites in the early modern period, the language
of the classroom was the vernacular. Thanks to the schools, the majority
of the population in many parts of Europe became literate for the first
time, although the literacy rate was still only about 25 per cent in Italy and
Spain in 1850, and 10 per cent or less in the Russian Empire - there was no
compulsory primary education before the Bolshevik Revolution.27
Elementary schools also furthered attempts to extend official linguistic
standards (‘the King’s English’, and its equivalents) to everyone. The school
curriculum often included the study of the national literature, Shakespeare,
Racine, Goethe, Manzoni and so on. In short, the schools encouraged
national languages and national communities at the expense of local lan¬
guages and local communities.
Railways encouraged the unification of national languages by making
internal migration easier, and they also delivered the metropolitan newspa¬
pers to the provinces. National newspapers presented the news in the same
form of language to all readers within the national borders. Radio and tele¬
vision brought the standard language, ‘BBC English’, for example, to a still
wider audience. Gradually, the majority of French people came — for the
first time - to speak French, the Germans German and the Italians Italian.
An exemplary study of the history of Italian after the country was polit¬
ically united in i860 gives due weight to all the factors mentioned above.
Beginning from the estimate that in i860, less than 3 per cent of the pop¬
ulation used Italian for everyday purposes, Tullio De Mauro discusses the
role of the school, the army, the media of communication and, not least,
the part played in the unification of the language by the new capital city,
Rome, and by its bureaucracy, recruited as it was from different parts of the
peninsula and thus unable to communicate in anything but the standard
language.28
As in the case of the so-called ‘rise of the vernaculars’, however, the
temptations of Whig or triumphalist history must be avoided. Once again,
an emphasis on competition is in order. The simple model of‘one nation,
one language’ did not fit many parts of Europe. What looked from the centre
like unification was viewed from the periphery as cultural invasion, an at¬
tack on alternative languages such as Czech, Occitan, Flemish or Welsh.
Languages became symbols of political autonomy and weapons in polit¬
ical conflicts, even in schools. In Brittany in the nineteenth and early
27 Carlo Cipolla, Literacy and Development in the West (Harmondsworth, 1969), p. 115; Jeffrey Brooks,
When Russia Learned To Read (Princeton, 1985).
28 De Mauro, Storia linguistica.

i68
Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
twentieth centuries, children were punished if they did not speak French
in the playground, just as boys in earlier centuries had been punished for
not speaking Latin. In Finland, the journalist-poet Adolf Arwidsson urged
the use of Finnish in schools in order to make Finland a ‘united whole’,
but for ethnic Swedes, Finnish was a foreign language.29
The linguistic diversity of the Habsburg Empire became a liability, since
speakers ol its different languages demanded first linguistic autonomy and
then political autonomy as well. The early nineteenth century was a cru¬
cial period in the standardization of a number of these languages, thanks
to the efforts of scholars and writers such as Jernej Kopitar for Slovene,
Jan Kollar and L’udovit Stur for Slovak, Vuk Stefanovic Karadzic and
Milovan Vidakovic for Serbian and Ljudevit Gaj for Croat. Kopitar, for
example, wanted to purify Serbian from Russian, while Vidakovic was
more concerned to eliminate words coming from Turkish, Hungarian and
German.30 In 1850, a formal treaty was signed between Serb and Croat
writers (on the neutral ground of Vienna), accepting a common standard
of ‘Serbo-Croat’.31
Despite these attempts at homogenization, varieties of language proved
impossible to suppress. In Belgium, we need to speak of ‘triglossia’
rather than diglossia, a situation of competition and conflict not only
between French (the language of administration, the upper classes, and the
Walloons) and Flemish (the language of the majority of the population),
but also between Flemish and Dutch, a more standardized variety of the
same language.32
Norway offers another illustration of the competition between varieties
of language and also of their politicization. When Norway became inde¬
pendent from Denmark in 1814, the intellectuals tried to make the language
independent as well, and there was a movement in favour of landsmal (a
term which means both the rural and the national language). In the late
nineteenth century, there was a reaction against this rural, popular and
Western norm in favour of bokmdl (‘book language ) or riksmdl (‘state
language’), a variety which was at once closer to Danish, to the language
of the upper classes and to the speech of eastern Norway. Since that time,
ministers and members of parliament have been involved in attempts to
19 John H. Wuorinen, Nationalism in Modern Finland (New York, 1931).
50 On Kolldr, Peter Brock, The Slovak National Awakening (Toronto, 1976); on Vuk, Duncan Wilson,
The Life and Times of Vuk Stefanovic Karadzic (Oxford, 1970); cf. Thomas Butler, ‘The War for a
Serbian Language and Orthography’, Harvard Slavic Studies 5 (1970), pp. 1-75.
51 Wilson, Life, pp. 312-3.
3* Roland Willemyns, ‘Religious Fundamentalism and Language Planning in Nineteenth-Century
Flanders’, IJGLSA 2 (1997), pp. 281-302; Wim Vandenbussche, ‘Triglossia and Pragmatic Variety
Choice in Nineteenth-Century Brug es', Journal of Historical Pragmatics 3 (2002).

## 169
Epilogue: languages and nations
fuse the two forms of Norwegian, now known as riksmal and nynorsk (‘new
Norwegian’), but they remain distinct.33
Even alphabets became a cause of contention. Despite their linguistic
union, Serbs and Croats used two different alphabets. The Serbs, who were
Orthodox Christians and looked eastwards to Russia, wrote in Cyrillic,
while the Croats, who were Catholics and looked westwards, preferred the
Latin alphabet for this very reason. The Romanians changed alphabets
in the nineteenth century, abandoning Cyrillic because it symbolized the
Orthodox tradition, while the Latin alphabet signified secularism, taking
Paris as a cultural model. In Turkey in the 1920s, Kemal Atatiirk ordered his
people to give up writing in the Arabic script and adopt a slightly modified
version of the Latin alphabet, to symbolize the break with the Ottoman
past and the rapprochement with the West. In similar fashion, Peter the
Great had taken a personal interest in the reform of the Cyrillic alphabet
in 1708, because the break with conventions derived from Church Slavonic
signified secularism and Westernization.
These and other alphabet wars’ are reminiscent of what Lreud famously
called ‘the narcissism of minor differences’, exaggerating the distance
between self and other.34 The same point might be made about the increas¬
ing importance of purism.
## NATIONALISM AND PURITY
The nineteenth century was a time of a number of strong movements
of linguistic purification, associated with nationalism.35 As we have seen,
purity and standardization had often been discussed in early modern Europe
with reference to the language of elites. These debates were now extended
to include the language of everyone. What is more, the language of peasants
was often taken as a standard. One reason for choosing this standard was
that rustic language was freer from contamination by foreign words because
peasants met fewer foreigners, a point that had already been made in the
sixteenth century (above, p. 23). In the nineteenth century, however, the
peasants and their language were often idealized as symbols of national
values. The linguists participated in the general ‘discovery of the people’
and their culture by European folklorists and other intellectuals in the early
nineteenth century.36
33 Einar Haugen, Language Conflict and Language Planning (Cambridge, MA, 1966).
34 Anton Blok, The Narcissism of Minor Differences’ (1998: repr. Honour and Violence, Cambridge,
2001, pp. 115-31).
33 Bjorn Jernudd and Michael Shapiro (eds.), The Politics of Language Purism (Berlin, 1989); George
Thomas, Linguistic Purism (London, 1991).
36 Peter Burke, Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe (1978: revised ed., Aldershot, 1995), chapter 1.

170 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Writers were becoming increasingly uncomfortable with high or formal
language and took popular speech as a model instead. William Wordsworth,
for instance, declared his intention ‘to adapt to the uses of poetry, the
ordinary language of conversation among the middling and lower orders of
the people’.37 Achim von Arnim, a Prussian poet, argued that the folksongs
he collected ‘united their dispersed people {sammelte sein zerstreutes Volk)
in a German-speaking area that was divided into a number of states.
In Finland, the language of the ‘unspoiled’ peasant was the model for a
pure national language.38 In Norway, the supporters of landsmdl\\a.& similar
ideals. Again, Vuk Stefanovic Karadzic followed the popular usage of Bosnia
and Hercegovina in his standardization of Serbian.39 The campaign for
purity also involved the elimination of foreign words.
The movement for Greek independence included attempts to elimi¬
nate foreign, especially Turkish, words and thus create a pure language,
katharevousa. Adamantios Korais, for instance, one of the nationalist
leaders, like Henri Estienne in sixteenth-century France (above, p. 147)
denounced ‘borrowing from strangers . . . words and phrases amply avail¬
able in one’s own language’. These words were to be rooted out. The gaps left
by the disappearance of foreign words were to be filled with ancient Greek
terms, including compounds. Thus potato, for example, would no longer
be patata but geomelon, ‘earth-apple’ (on the model, ironically enough, of
the French pomme de terre). In 1830, the new Greek state officially adopted
katbarevousad0
Katharevousa had anti-democratic implications. For this reason, in the
late nineteenth century, there was a campaign for a ‘people’s language’,
demotike, which eventually succeeded. For the same reason, the right-
wing government of the colonels (1967-74) brought back katharevousa,
while in 1976 demotike became once again the language of the state and of
education.4’
In Bulgaria, too, some purists wanted to exclude from the language the
Turkish words that had entered it while the country had been part of the
Ottoman Empire, replacing these words with terms from Church Slavonic
or Russian because these Slav languages were more prestigious (other purists
attacked the Russian expressions as foreign innovations and defended the
37 William Wordsworth, Lyrical Ballads (London, 1798), preface.
## Wuorinen, Nationalism. 39 Wilson, Karadzic.
40 Michael Jeffreys, ‘Adamantios Korais: Language and Revolution’, in Roland Sussex and J. Christopher
Lade (eds.), Culture and Nationalism in Nineteenth-Century Eastern Europe (Columbus, Ohio, 1983),
pp. 42-55.
41 Robert Browning, ‘Greek Diglossia Yesterday and Today’, International Journal of the Sociology of
Language35 (1982), pp. 49-68; Kostas Kazazis, ‘Dismantling Modern Greek Diglossia: the Aftermath’,
Lingua e Stile 36 (2001), pp. 291-8.

Epilogue: languages and nations 171
Turkish ones as traditional).42 As for the Turks, they were also concerned
with purifying their language, particularly after the Ottoman Empire had
been replaced after the First World War by a nation-state, and the Turkish
Language Association (Turk Dil Kurumu) did its best to eliminate Arabic
and Persian words.43
In Germany, the preoccupation with linguistic purity was an old one, as
we have seen (above, p. 150). The career of Joachim Campe suggests that this
concern was being taken more seriously, or taken seriously by more people,
at the end of the eighteenth century.44 Throughout the nineteenth century,
there were regular attempts to purify the language from foreign words. In
1885, the movement took institutional form with the foundation of the
German Language Association (.Allgemein Deutsche Sprachverein), with its
journal MutterspracheD The association was particularly concerned with
the invasion of French and English words. The 1930s were the high point of
the so-called Fremdwortjagd, the hunt for and replacement of foreign terms
which had concealed themselves in the German language. Thus, Perron,
‘platform’, became Bahnsteig, Universitdt turned into Althochschule, and so
on. This programme fitted in quite well with Nazi ideals of Deutschtum
and cultural purification. The Nazis supported the Sprachverein at first,
although they ended the hunt in 1940 after a linguist had been rash enough
to criticize the language of the FiihrerP6
In England, too, there was a similar movement, even if its scale was com¬
paratively small. Take the case of William Barnes, for instance.47 Barnes
was a Dorset dialect poet, a contemporary and a friend of Thomas Hardy,
an enthusiast for Anglo-Saxon and for English as a ‘Teutonic tongue’,
free from what Barnes described as ‘Latin and Greek mingled-speech’.
Barnes’s book on rhetoric (which, in order to avoid a word of French
origin, he called ‘speechcraft’) was an essay (which he called a ‘trial’)
in support (which he called ‘upholding’) of ‘our fine old Anglo-Saxon
tongue’.48
V- Giuseppe Dell’Agata, ‘The Bulgarian Language Question from the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth
Century’, in Picchio and Goldblatt, Aspects, vol. I, pp. 157-88.
43 Uriel Heyd, Language Reform in Modern Turkey {Jerusalem, 1954); Kemal H. Karpat, A Language
in Search of a Nation: Turkish in the Nation-State’, in Scaglione, Emergence, pp. 175-208, at p. 200.
44 Jurgen Schiewe, Sprachpurismus und Emanzipation: J. H. Campes Verdeutschungsprogramm
(Hildesheim, 1988).
45 Townson, Mother-Tongue, pp. 98—107.
46 Peter von Polenz, ‘Sprachpurismus und Nationalsozialismus’, in Eberhard Lammert (ed.), Ger-
manistik (Frankfurt, 1967), pp. 113-65; Alan Kirkness, Zur Sprachreinigung in Deutschem eine his-
torische Dokumentation i/8p—i8yi (Tubingen, 1975)’ Kirkness, Das Phanomen des Purismus in der
Geschichte des Deutschen’, in Werner Besch et al. (eds.), Sprachgeschichte (Berlin, 1984), pp. 290-9.
47 Willis D. Jacobs, William Barnes, Linguist (Albuquerque, 1952).
48 William Barnes, Outline of English Speechcraft (London, 1878).

172 Languages and Communities in Early Modern Europe
Since the term ‘purist’ has a Latin origin, it seems more appropriate to
describe Barnes as a ‘cleanser’ of the English tongue, along the lines of John
Cheke and Ralph Lever (above, p. 149). According to Barnes, there was no
need to borrow: English vocabulary (or as he called it, ‘word-stock’) could
be increased by creating compounds, such as ‘speech-craft’ or ‘word-stock
itself. Barnes was a populist, or, as he would have said, ‘folkish’. He was not,
it should be added, a proto-fascist. On the contrary, one of the reasons for
his opposition to Latinized English was that it was undemocratic, because
it was difficult for ordinary people to understand.
Barnes was relatively isolated (not to say eccentric) in his time, although
a Society for Pure English was founded in 1913 with the poet Robert Bridges
as its president. The purity movement was, and indeed still is, taken more
seriously in other countries, among them France. The concern with the
purity of language, relatively muted in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, became more acute in France after the Second World War. It
should perhaps be interpreted as a reaction to and against the linguistic
aspect of what the French used to call le defi americain.
In 1964, the intellectual Rene Etiemble launched his attack, in the book
Parlez-vous franglais? General de Gaulle found time between the Algerian
crisis and the events of 1968 to set up a committee for defence of the French
language. The Bas-Lauriol law (1975) and the Toubon law (1994) prohibited
the use of a foreign word by government departments, ‘le shuttle’, for
instance, when an approved native word (in this case, la navette) already
conveyed the meaning, while a delegation generale a la langue frangaise still
meets to coin more terms of this kind. The issue remains a live one in
## France.49
The current ‘language question' illustrates both the continuities between
the periods separated by the events of 1789 and some of the contrasts as well.
The preoccupation with linguistic purity has a long history, as we have seen.
What is distinctively modern is the attempt to legislate for languages, the
direct intervention of the government in a domain that was once regulated,
if at all, by academies of scholars and writers. It was at this time, in the
nineteenth century, that scholars and writers turned to writing histories
of the organic growth of their national languages. This is precisely the
kind of national, or even nationalist, history that this book - together with
other studies in the social history of language, with their stress on multiple
communities and identities - has been trying to undermine.
49 Philip Thody, Franglais: Forbidden English, Forbidden American (London, 1995).

## APPENDIX
Languages in Europe 1450—1789
‘Cf.’ signals the problem of deciding whether a given variety of language
should be classified - for the period 1450-1789 - as a language or a dialect.
## 1. Albanian
- Arabic (spoken in early modern Spain)
## 3. Aragonese (cf. Catalan)
## 4. Basque
## 5. Belorussian (cf. Ruthenian)
## 6. Breton
## 7. Bulgarian
## 8. Catalan
## 9. Church Slavonic
## 10. Cornish
## 11. Croat (cf. Serbian)
## 12. Curonian
## 13. Czech (cf. Slovak)
- Dalmatian (a romance language, not a dialect of Croat)
## 15. Danish
## 16. Dutch
## 17. English
## 18. Estonian
## 19. Faroese (cf. Danish)
## 20. Finnish
## 21. Flemish (cf. Dutch)
## 22. French
## 23. Frisian
## 24. Galician (cf. Portuguese)
## 25. Gascon (cf. Occitan)
## 26. German
## 173

## 174
Appendix: languages in Europe 1450—1789
## 27. Gothic
## 28. Greek (demotic)
## 29. Hebrew
## 30. Hungarian
## 31. Icelandic
## 32. Irish
## 33. Italian
## 34. Karelian (cf. Finnish)
## 35. Kashubian (cf. Polish)
## 36. Ladino (cf. Spanish)
## 37. Lallans (cf. English)
## 38. Latin
## 39. Latvian
## 40. Lithuanian
## 41. Livonian
## 42. Luxembourgian (cf German)
## 43. Macedonian (cf Croat)
## 44. Maltese
## 45. Manx
## 46. Moldavian (cf Romanian)
## 47. Norwegian (cf. Danish)
## 48. Occitan
## 49. Polabian
## 50. Polish
## 51. Portuguese
## 52. Provencal (cf Occitan)
## 53. Romanian
## 54. Romansh
## 55. Romany
## 56. Russian
## 57. Ruthenian (cf. Belorusian, Ukrainian)
## 58. Sami
## 59. Sardinian
## 60. Scottish Gaelic
## 61. Serbian (cf. Croat)
## 62. Slovak (cf Czech)
## 63. Slovene
- Sorbian (Upper and Lower, cf Czech)
## 65. Spanish

Appendix: languages in Europe 1450—i/8p
## 175
## 66. Swedish
## 67. Turkish
## 68. Ukrainian (cf. Ruthenian)
## 69. Vlach
## 70. Welsh
## 71. Yiddish

## Bibliography
This list is confined to works cited in the notes.
Aarsleffi Hans, The Study of Language in England, iy8o—i86o (Princeton, 1967).
Aarsleff, Hans, ‘The Rise and Decline of Adam and his Ursprache in Seventeenth-
Century Thought’, in Allison P. Coudert (ed.), The Language of Adam
(Wiesbaden, 1999), pp. 277-95.
Aehle, Wilhelm, Die Anfange des Unterrichts in der englischen Sprache, besonders auf
den Ritterakademien (Hamburg, 1938).
Ahnlund, Nils, Svenskt och Nordiskt (Stockholm, 1943).
Aldrete, Bernardo de, Del origen, yprincipio de la lengua castellana, (1604: facsimile
ed., Madrid, 1972).
Alonso, Amado, Castellano, espahol, idioma nacional: historia spiritual de tres nom-
bres (Buenos Aires, 1938).
Amelang, James, Honoured Citizens of Barcelona (Princeton, 1986).
Anchieta, Jose de, Llrica portuguesa e tupi, ed. Armando Cardoso (Sao Paulo,
## 1984).
Anderson, Benedict, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread
of Nationalism (1983: revised ed., London, 1991).
Aretino, Pietro, Sei Giornate, ed. Giovanni Aquilecchia (Bari, 1975).
Armstrong, Charles A. J., ‘The Language Question in the Low Countries’, in John
R. Hale, Roger Highfield and Beryl Smalley (eds.), Europe in the Late Middle
Ages (London, 1965), pp. 386-409.
Arndt, Erwin and Brandt, G., Luther und die deutsche Sprache (Leipzig, 1983).
Auerbach, Erich, ‘La cour et la ville’ (1951: English translation in his Scenes from
the Drama of European Literature, New York, 1959), pp. 133—79.
Auerbach, Erich, Literary Language and its Public (1958: English translation,
## London, 1965).
Auroux, Sylvain, Histoire des idees linguistiques, 2 vols (Liege, 1989—92).
Auty, Robert, ‘The Role of Purism in the Development of the Slavonic Literary
Languages’, Slavic and East European Review 51 (1973), pp. 335—43.
Auty, Robert, ‘Czech’, in Schenker and Stankiewicz, Slavic Literary Languages,
pp. 163-82.
Axtell, James, ‘Babel of Tongues: Communicating with the Indians in Eastern
North America’, in Gray and Fiering, Language Encounter, pp. 15-60.
## 176

## 177
## Bibliography
Backvis, Claude, Quelques remarques sur le bilinguisme latino-polonais dans la
Pologne du xvie siecle (Brussels, 1958).
Baeumer, Max L., Luther and the Rise of the German Literary Language: a Critical
Reassessment’, in Scaglione, Emergence, pp. 95—117.
Baggioni, Daniel, Langues et nations en Europe (Paris, 1997).
Bailey, Richard W., Images ofEnglish: a Cultural History of the Language (Ann Arbor,
## 1991).
Bak, Janos, ‘Linguistic Pluralism in Medieval Hungary’, in The Culture of Chris¬
tendom, ed. Marc A. Meyer (London, 1993), pp. 269—79.
Bakhtin, Mikhail M. [‘V. S. Voloshinov’], Marxism and the Philosophy of Language
(1929: English translation, New York, 1973).
Bakhtin, Mikhail M., Rabelais and his World{iy6y. English translation, Cambridge,
## MA, 1971).
Bakhtin, Mikhail M., The Dialogic Imagination (Austin, 1981).
Bakker, Peter, ‘A Basque Nautical Pidgin’, Journal of Pidgin and Creole 2 (1987),
pp. 1-30.
Bakker, Peter and Maarten Mous (eds.), Mixed Languages (Amsterdam, 1994).
Baldi, Camillo, Lettera missiva (Bologna, 1622).
Balsamo, Jean, Repertoire des traductions de Titalien 1570—1600 (Rome, 1992).
Balsamo, Jean, ‘Traduire de l’italien: ambitions sociales et contraintes editoriales a
la fin du i6e siecle’, in Dominique de Courcelles (ed.), Traduire et adapter a.
la Renaissance (Paris, 1998), pp. 89-98.
Bandle, Oskar (ed.), The Nordic Languages, vol. 1 (Berlin, 2002).
Banfi, Emanuele (ed.), La formazione delTEuropa linguistica (Florence, 1993).
Banniard, Michel, Viva voce: communication ecrite et communication orale du IVe
au IXe siecle en Occident latin (Paris, 1992).
Banfi, Emanuele (ed.), La formazione delTEuropa linguistica (Florence, 1993).
Barber, Charles L., Early Modern English (Cambridge, 1976).
Barbour, Stephen, and Cathy Carmichael (eds.), Language and Nationalism in
Europe (Oxford, 2000).
Bardy, Gustave, La question des langues dans LEglise ancienne (Paris, 1948).
Barnes, William, Outline of English Speechcraft (London, 1878).
Barros, Joao de, Dialogo (1540: ed. Luciana Stegnano Picchio, Modena, 1959).
Bartlett, Robert, The Making of Europe (1993: second ed., Harmondsworth, 1994).
Bauman, Richard, Let Your Words be Few: Symbolism of Speech and Silence among
the Quakers (Cambridge, 1983).
Bee, Pierre, La langue occitane (1963: second ed., Paris, 1967).
Beccaria, Gian Luigi, Spagnolo e spagnoli in Italia (Milan, 1968).
Beccaria, Gian Luigi, Sicuterat: ilLatino di chi non lo sa (1999: second ed., Milan,
## 2001).
Beek, Marinus van, An Enquiry into Puritan Vocabulary (Groningen, 1969).
Belaval, Yvon, Etudes Leibniziennes (Paris, 1976).
Bell, David A., ‘Lingua Populi, Lingua Dei: Language, Religion and the Origins of
## French Revolutionary Nationalism’, American Historical Review 100 (1995),
pp.1403-37-

## 178
## Bibliography
Bell, David A., The Cult of the Nation (Cambridge, MA, 2001).
Bely, Lucien, Espions et ambassadeurs (Paris, 1990).
Bembo, Pietro, Prose della vulgar Lingua (1525: repr. Bembo, Prose e rime, ed. Carlo
Dionisotti, Turin, i960), pp. 71-309.
Benassy-Berling, Marie-Cecile, Jean-Pierre Clement and Alain Milhou (eds.),
Langues et cultures en Amerique espagnole coloniale (Paris, 1993).
Ayres-Bennett, Wendy, Vaugelas and the Development of the French Language
(London, 1987).
Bensaud-Vincent, Bernadette, and Marco Abbri (eds.), Lavoisier in Euro¬
pean Context: Negotiating a New Language for Chemistry (Canton, MA,
## 1995) -
Beranger, Jean, ‘Latin et langues vernaculaires dans la Hongrie du I7e si£cle’, Revue
Historique 242 (1969), pp. 5-28.
Beranger, Jean (ed.), Les ‘Gravamina: remonstrances des di'etes de Hongrie de 1655 a
1681 (Paris, 1973).
Bertelli, Sergio, ‘Egemonia linguistica come egemonia culturale’, Biblioth'eque
d’Humanisme et Renaissance 38 (1976), pp. 249—81.
Besch, Werner, Sprachlandschaften und Sprachausgleich im 15. Jht: Studien zur
Erforschung der spatmittelhochdeutschen Schreibdialekte und zur Entstehung der
neuhochdeutschen Schriftsprache (Munich, 1967).
Besch, Werner, et al. (eds.), Sprachgeschichte: Ein Handbuch zur Geschichte der
deutschen Sprqche und ihre Erforschung (Berlin, 1984).
Bethlen, Miklos, Oneletlrasa, 2 vols. (Budapest, 1955).
Bieler, Ludwig, ‘Das Mittellatein als Sprachproblem’, Lexis 2 (1949), pp. 98—104.
Binns, James W., Intellectual Culture in Elizabethan andJacobean England (London,
## 1990).
Binotti, Lucia, ‘La “lengua compahera del imperio”: discursos peninsulares sobre
la hispanizacion de America’, in A. Alonso Gonzalez et al. (eds.), Actas del
III Congresso Internacional de historia de la lengua espanola, 2 vols. (Madrid,
1996) , pp. 621-32.
Bircher, Martin (ed.), Sprachgesellschaften (Hamburg, 1978).
Birnbaum, Solomon A., Yiddish (Toronto, 1979).
Blackall, Eric A., The Emergence of German as a Literary Language, 1700—77
(Cambridge, 1959).
Blair, Ann, ‘La persistance du Latin comme langue de science a la fin de la Renais¬
sance’, in Roger Chartier and Pietro Corsi (eds.), Sciences et langues en Europe
(Paris, 1996), pp. 21-42.
Blank, Paula, Broken English: Dialects and the Politics of Language in Renaissance
Writings (London, 1996).
Blanning, Timothy, The Culture of Power and the Power of Culture: Old Regime
Europe 1660—1789 (Oxford, 2002).
Blok, Anton, Honour and Violence (Cambridge, 2001).
Bloomfield, Leonard, Language (New York, 1933).
Bone, Gavin I)., ‘Tindale and the English Language’, in Stanley L. Greenslade,
The Work of William Tindale (London, 1938), pp. 50-68.

## Bibliography 179
Bono, Dianne M., The Cultural Diffusion of Spanish Humanism in New Spain
(New York, 1991).
Borghini, Vincenzio, Scritti inediti e rari, ed. John R. Woodhouse (Bologna, 1971).
Borst, Arno, Der Turmbau von Babel, 4 vols. in 6 (Stuttgart, 1957-63).
Bouhours, Dominique, Entretiens d’Ariste et d’Eugene (1671: new ed., Paris, 1962).
Bourdieu, Pierre, Distinction (1979: English translation, London, 1984).
Bourdieu, Pierre, Language and Symbolic Power (1982: English translation,
## Cambridge, 1991).
Bouza, Fernando, Corn manuscrito: una historia cultural del siglo de oro (Madrid,
## 2001).
Boyer, Henri and Philippe Gardy (eds.), La question linguistique au sudau moment
de la Revolution Frangaise (Montpellier, 1985).
Brading, David, The First Americans (Cambridge, 1991).
Branden, Lode van den, Het streven naar verheerlijking, zuivering en opbouw van
bet Nederlands in de i6de eeuw (Ghent, 1956).
Brattegard, Olav, Die mittelniederdeutsche Geschaftsprache des hansischen Kaufmanns
zu Bergen (Bergen, 1945).
Bree, Cor van, ‘The Development of so-called Town Frisian’, in Bakker and Mous,
Mixed Languages, pp. 69-82.
Brerewood, Edward, Enquiries touching the Diversity of Language (London, 16x4).
Brewer, Derek (ed.), Chaucer: the Critical Heritage, vol. 1 (London, 1978).
Brink, Jean (ed.). Privileging Gender in Early Modern England (Kirksville, 1993).
Brock, Peter, The Slovak National Awakening (Toronto, 1976).
Brogi Bercofif, Giovanna, et al. (eds.), Traduzione e rielaborazione nelle letterature
di Polonia, Ucraina e Russia (Alessandria, 1999).
Brooks, Jeffrey, When Russia Learned To Read (Princeton, 1985).
Browne, Edward, Journal (London, 1923).
Browning, Robert, ‘Greek Diglossia Yesterday and Today’, InternationalJournal of
the Sociology of Language 35 (1982), pp. 49—68.
Brun, Auguste, Recherches historiques sur Tintroduction du frangais dans lesprovinces
du Midi (Paris, 1923).
Brun, Auguste, L ’introduction de la langue fangaise en Bearn et en Roussillon (Paris,
## 1927).
Bruni, Leonardo, Epistolae, ed. Lorenzo Mehus (Florence, 1741).
Brunot, Ferdinand, Histoire de la langue frangaise, 12 vols. (Paris, 1905-53).
Brunt, Richard J., The Influence of the French Language on the German Vocabulary,
1649-1735 (Berlin, 1983).
Buck, Christopher D., ‘The Russian Language Question in the Imperial Academy
of Sciences’, in Picchio and Goldblatt, Aspects, vol. 11, pp. 187-233.
Bulloch, J. M., ‘The Delight of the Doric in the Diminutive’, in William A. Craigie
et al., The Scottish Tongue (1924), pp. 127-51.
Burchfield, Robert W., The English Language (Oxford, 1985).
Burckhardt, Jacob, Reflections on History (1906: English translation, London, 1943).
Burke, Peter, Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe (1978: second ed., Aldershot,
## I994)-

## 180 Bibliography
Burke, Peter, Historical Anthropology of Early Modern Europe (Cambridge, 1987).
Burke, Peter, The Fortunes of the Courtier (Cambridge, 1995).
Burke, Peter, ‘Translations into Latin in Early Modern Europe’, in Burke and
Ronnie Hsia (eds.), The Cultural History ofTranslation in Early Modern Europe
## (forthcoming).
Burke, Peter and Roy Porter (eds.), 7 he Social History of Language (Cambridge,
## 1987).
Burke, Peter and Roy Porter (eds.), Language, Self and Society (Cambridge, 1991).
Burke, Peter and Roy Porter (eds.), Languages and Jargons (Cambridge, 1995).
Buruma, Ian, ‘The Road to Babel’, New York Review of Books (31 May 2001),
pp. 23-6.
Butler, Thomas, ‘The War for a Serbian Language and Orthography’, Harvard
Slavic Studies 5 (1970), pp. 1-75.
Cable, Thomas, ‘The Rise of Written Standard English’, in Scaglione, Emergence,
## PP- 75-94-
Calibres, Francois de, Des mots a la mode (Paris, 1692).
Callibres, Francis de, Du bon et du mauvais usage (1693: repr. Geneva, 1972).
Callieres, Francois de, De la maniere de negocier avec les souverains (Paris, 1716).
Calvet, Louis-Jean, Linguistique et colonialisme (Paris, 1974).
Calvet, Louis-Jean, Language Wars and Linguistic Politics (1987: English translation,
## Oxford, 1998).
Camden, William, Remains Concerning Britain (London, 1605).
Cannon, Christopher, The Making of Chaucer’s English: a Study of Words
(Cambridge, 1998).
Canonico-de Rochemonteix, Elvezio, Elpoliglotismo en el teatro de Lope de Vega
(Kassel, 1991).
Carvalhao Buescu, Maria Leonor, O estudo das linguas exoticas no seculo xvi (Lisbon,
## 1983).
Castro, Americo, Lapeculiaridadlinguistica rioplatensey su sentido historico (Buenos
## Aires, 1941).
Catach, Nina, L ’orthographic frangaise a Tepoque de la Renaissance (Geneva, 1968).
Catach, Nina, Histoire de Torthographie frangaise (Paris, 2001).
Certeau, Michel de, Jacques Revel and Dominique Julia, Une Politique de la langue:
la Revolution Frangaise et les patois (Paris, 1975).
Cesarotti, Melchiorre, Saggio sopra la lingua italiana (1785: repr. in Emilio Bigi
(ed.), DalMuratori al Cesarotti, Milan and Naples, i960), pp. 304—468.
Chapelain, Jean, Lettres, ed. Jean-Philippe Tamizey de Larroque, 2 vols. (Paris,
## 1880-3).
Chartier, Roger, and Corsi, Pietro (eds.), Sciences et langues en Europe (Paris, 1996).
Chasca, Fidmund de, ‘The Phonology of the Speech of the Negroes in Early Spanish
Drama’, Hispanic Review 14 (1946), pp. 322-39.
Chaudenson, Robert, Les creoles frangais (Paris, 1979).
Chiappelli, Fredi (ed.), The Fairest Flower: the Emergence of Linguistic National
Consciousness in Renaissance Europe (Florence, 1985).
Christin, Olivier, Une revolution symbolique (Paris, 1991).

i8i
## Bibliography
Christmann, Hans Helmut, Italienische Sprache in Deutschland’, in Schroder,
Fremdsprachenunterricht, pp. 43-56.
Churchill, Awnsley and John (eds.), A Collection of Voyages, 6 vols. (London, 1732).
Cifoletti, Guido, La lingua franca mediterranea (Padua, 1989).
Cipolla, Carlo, Literacy and Development in the West (Harmondsworth, 1969).
Cipolla, Carlo, Fighting the Plague in Seventeenth-Century Ltaly (Madison, 1981).
Cittadini, Celso, Formazione della lingua Toscana (Florence, 1600).
Coates, William A., ‘The German Pidgin-Italian of the Sixteenth-Century Lanzi-
chenecchi, Papers from the Fourth Annual Kansas Linguistics Conference (1969),
pp. 66-74.
Cole, Richard, ‘Reformation Printers: Unsung Heroes’, Sixteenth-Century Journal
15 (1984), pp. 327—39.
Cole, William, The Blecheley Diary (London, 1931).
Coletti, Vittorio, Parole delpulpito: chiesa e movimenti religiosi tra latino e volgare
(Casale, 1983).
Colie, Rosalie L., Some Thankfulness to Constantine: a Study of English Influence
upon the Early Works of Constantijn Huygens (The Hague, 1956).
Collet Sedola, Sabina, ‘L’etude de l espagnoi en France a l’epoque d’Anne
d’Autriche’, in Charles Mazouet (ed.), L’age d’or de I’influence espagnole:
la France et VEspagne a I’epoque d’Anne d’Autriche (Mont-de-Marsan,
## 1991).
Colley, Linda, Britons (London, 1995).
Cornish, Vaughan, Borderlands of Language in Europe and their Relation to the
Historic Frontiers of Christendom (London, 1936).
Cortelazzo, Manlio, ‘Lingua franca’, in Hans Georg Beck, Manoussos Manous-
sacas and Agostino Pertusi (eds.), Venezia centro di mediazione tra Oriente e
Occidente (Florence, 1977), pp. 523—35.
Corvisier, Andre, Arts et societes dans TEurope du i8e siecle (Paris, 1978).
Coulton, George G., Europe’s Apprenticeship: a Survey of Medieval Latin with
Examples (London, 1940).
Crane, Susan, ‘Social Aspects of Bilingualism in the Thirteenth Century’, in
Michael Prestwich, R. H. Britnell and Robin Frame (eds.), Thirteenth-Century
England (Woodbridge, 1989).
Croce, Benedetto, Uomini e cose della vecchia Italia, vol. 1 (Bari, 1926).
Croll, Morris W., Style, Rhetoric and Rhythm (Princeton, 1966).
Crosby, Alfred W., The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences
of1492 (Newport, CT, 1972).
Crouzet, Denis, Les guerriers de Dieu, 2 vols. (Paris, 1990).
Crystal, David, Language Death (Cambridge, 2000).
Cuervo, Rufino J., ‘El Castellano en America’, Bulletin Hispanique 3 (1901),
pp. 35-62.
Curtis, Mark H., Oxford and Cambridge in Transition, 1558-1642 (Oxford, 1959).
Curto, Diogo Ramada, ‘A lingua e o imperio’, in Francisco Bethencourt and Kirti
N. Chaudhuri (eds.), Historia da expansao portuguesa, vol. 1 (Lisbon, 1998),
## PP- 4H-33•

## 182 Bibliography
D’ Agostino, Mari, La Piazza e I’altare: momenti dellapolitica linguistica della chiesa
siciliana (Palermo, 1988).
Danckert, Werner, Unehrlicb Leute (Munich, 1963).
Dardi, Andrea, Dalla provincia all'Europa: I’influsso del francese sull’italiano tra il
1650 e il 171$ (Florence, 1992).
Daube, Anna, Der Aufsteig der Muttersprache im deutschen Denken des 17 und 16
Jahrhunderts (Frankfurt, 1949).
Davies, Norman, God’s Playground: a History of Poland, vol. 1 (Oxford, 1981).
Davies, Rees R., ‘The Peoples of Britain and Ireland 1100—1400: Language and
Historical Mythology’, Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 7 (1997),
pp. 1-24.
Davis, Natalie Z., Society and Culture in Early Modern France (Stanford, 1975).
Defoe, Daniel, An Essay upon Projects (1697: repr., Menston, 1969).
Delepierre, Octave, Macaroneana, 2 vols. (London, 1862—3).
Dell’Agata, Giuseppe, ‘The Bulgarian Language Question from the Sixteenth to
the Nineteenth Century’, in Picchio and Goldblatt, Aspects, vol. 1, pp. 157—88.
De Mauro, Tullio, Storia linguistica dell’Italia unita (1963: revised ed., Rome, 1991).
Demonet, Marie-Lucie, Les voix du signe. Nature et origine du langage a la Renais¬
sance (1480-1780) (Paris, 1992).
Derrida, Jacques, Dissemination (1972: English translation, Chicago, 1982).
Devyver, Andre, Le sang epure (Brussels, 1973).
Deyon, Solange, and Alain Lottin, Les casseurs de Pete 1766 (Paris, 1981).
Diffley, Paul B., Paolo Beni: a Biographical and Critical Study (Oxford, 1988).
Dillard, Joey L., Black English: its History and Use in the United States (New York,
## 1972).
Dillard, Joey L., Toward a Social History of American English (Berlin, 1985).
Dimnik, Martin, ‘Gutenberg, Humanism, the Reformation and the Emergence
of the Slovene Literary Language 1550—1584’, Canadian Slavonic Papers 26
(1984), pp. 141-59.
Dimnik, Martin, ‘Primoz Trubar and the Mission to the South Slavs (1555-64)’,
Slavonic and East European Review 66 (1988), pp. 380—99.
Dionisotti, Carlo, ‘Introduzione’ to Pietro Bembo, Prose e rime (Turin, i960),
pp. 9-56.
Dionisotti, Carlo, Gli umanisti e il volgare jra quattro- e cinquecento (Florence,
## 1968).
Dolet, Etienne, La maniere de bien traduire (1540: repr. Paris, 1830).
Dominian, Leon, The Frontiers of Language and Nationality in Europe (New York,
## 1917)-
Douglas, Mary, Purity and Danger (London, 1966).
Droixhe, Daniel, La linguistique et Tappel de I’histoire (1600-1800) (Geneva and
## Paris, 1978).
Droixhe, Daniel, ‘Leibniz et le finno-ougrien’, in Tullio De Mauro and Lia Formi-
gari (eds.), Leibniz, Humboldt and the Origins of Comparativism (Amsterdam
and Philadelphia, 1990), pp. 3-29.

## 183
## Bibliography
Du Bellay, Joachim, Deffense et illustration de la langue frangoyse (1549: ed. Jean-
## Charles Monferras, Geneva, 2001).
Dubois, Claude Gilbert, Mythe et langage au i6e siecle (Bordeaux, 1970).
Dupleix, Scipion, Liberte de la langue frangoise en sa purete (1651: repr. Geneva,
## I973)-
Durkacz, Victor, The Decline of the Celtic Languages (Edinburgh, 1983).
Eco, Umberto, The Search for the Perfect Language (1993: English translation,
## Oxford, 1995).
Egenolff, Johan Augustin, Historie der Teutschen Sprache, 2 vols. (Leipzig, 1716-20).
Eisenstein, Elizabeth, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change, 2 vols. (Cambridge,
## 1979)-
Elias, Norbert, The Civilizing Process (1939: English translation, 2 vols., Oxford,
## 1981-2).
Elwert, W. Theodor, Studi di letteratura veneziana (Venice-Rome, 1958).
Elwert, W. Theodor, Aufsatze zur italienischen Lyrik (Wiesbaden, 1967).
Erasmus, ‘On Pronunciation’ (1528: English translation in Collected Works 26,
Toronto, 1985), pp. 347-475.
Erasmus, Ciceronianus (1528: English translation in Collected Works 28, Toronto,
1986), pp. 323-68.
Errington, J. Joseph, Language Shift (Cambridge, 1998).
Esparza Torres, Miguel Angel, Las ideas linguisticas de Antonio de Nebrija (Munster,
## 1995)-
Estebe, Janine, Tocsin pour un massacre (Paris, 1968).
Estienne, Henri, Deux dialogues du nouveau langage frangois (1578: ed. Pauline M.
## Smith, Geneva, 1980).
Estienne, Henri, La precedence du langage frangois (1579: ed. Edmond Huguet,
## Paris, 1896).
Evans, Robert J. W., The Making of the Habsburg Monarchy, 1550—1700: an Inter¬
pretation (Oxford, 1979).
Evans, Robert J. W., The Language of History and the History of Language (Oxford,
## 1998).
Evelyn, John, Diary, ed. Esmond S. De Beer, 6 vols. (Oxford, 1955).
Fabian, Bernhard, ‘Englisch als neue Fremdsprache des 18. Jahrhunderts’, in Dieter
Kimpel (ed.), Mehrsprachigkeit in der deutschen Aufkldrung (Hamburg, 1985),
pp. 178-96.
Fabian, Johannes, Language and Colonial Power (Cambridge, 1986).
Fauchet, Claude, Origine de la langue frangaise (Paris, 1581).
Faust, Manfred, ‘Schottelius’ Concept of Word Formation’ in Geckeler, Logos,
pp. 359-70.
Febvre, Lucien, ‘Politique royale ou civilisation frangaise? Remarques sur un
probleme d’histoire linguistique’, Revue de synthese historique 38 (1924),
## PP- 37-53-
Febvre, Lucien, ‘Langue et nationalite en France au i8e siecle’, Revue de synthese
historique 42 (1926), pp. 19—40.

184 Bi bliography
Febvre, Lucien, The Problem of Unbelief in the Sixteenth Century: the Religion of
Rabelais (1942: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1982).
Febvre, Lucien, and Henri-Jean Martin, The Coming of the Book (1958: English
translation, London, 1976).
Ferguson, Charles, ‘Diglossia’, Word 15 (1959), pp. 325-40.
Finkenstaedt, Thomas, ‘John Tompson’, in Schroder, Fremdsprachenunterricht,
## PP- 57-74-
Fiorelli, Piero, ‘Pour I’interpretation de I’ordonnance de Villers-Cotterets’, Le
fran^ais moderne 18 (1950), pp. 277-88.
Firmin-Didot, Ambroise, Aide Manuce et THellenisme a. Venise (Paris, 1875).
Fish, Stanley, Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive Communities
(Cambridge, MA, 1980).
Fisher, John H., The Emergence of Standard English (Lexington, 1996).
Fishman, Joshua A., Sociolinguistics (Rowley, MA, 1970).
Fishman, Joshua A., Language in Sociocultural Change (New York, 1972).
Flaherty, Peter, ‘The Politics of Linguistic Uniformity during the French Revolu¬
tion’, Historical Reflections 14 (1987), pp. 311-28.
Flasdieck, Hermann M., Der Gedanke einer englischen Sprachakademie (Jena, 1928).
Flecknoe, Richard, A Relation of Ten Years' Travels (London, no date but c. 1650).
Florio, John, First Fruits (London, 1578).
Fodor, Istvan, and Claude Hagege (eds.), Language Reform, vol. in (Hamburg,
## 1984).
Folena, Gianfranco, L’italiano in Europa: Esperienze linguistiche del Settecento
(Turin, 1983).
Folena, Gianfranco, II linguaggio del caos: studi sul plurilinguismo rinascimentale
(Turin, 1991).
Fonvisin, Denis I., Dramatic Works (Bern, 1974).
Formigari, Lia (ed.), Teorie epratiche linguistiche nell’Italia del '700 (Bologna, 1984).
Forster, Leonard W., The Poet’s Tongues: Multilingualism in Literature (Cambridge,
## 1970).
Fox, Adam, Oral and Literate Culture in England, 1700—1700 (Oxford, 2000).
Fox, Inman, La invencion de Espaha (Madrid, 1997).
Francois, Alexis, La grammaire du purisme et l Acadernie Fran false au iSe siecle (Paris,
## 1905).
Fraso Gracia, Juan Antonio, Historia del espanol de America (Madrid, 1999).
Freyre, Gilberto, The Masters and the Slaves (1933: English translation. New York,
## 1946).
Fries, Dagmar, Limpia, fija y da esplendor: la Real Academia Espahola ante el uso de
la lengua (Madrid, 1989).
Fumaroli, Marc, L’dge de I’eloquence (Geneva, 1980).
Fumerton, Patricia, ‘Homely Accents: Ben Jonson Speaking Low’, in Fumerton
and Simon Hunt (eds.), Renaissance Culture and the Everyday (Philadelphia,
■999). PP- 92-m.
FuretRre, Antoine, Le roman bourgeois (1666: repr. in Antoine Adam (ed.),
Romanciers du I7e siecle, Paris, 1968).

## Bibliography 185
Galbraith, Vivian H., ‘Language and Nationality in Medieval England’, Transac¬
tions of the Royal Historical Society 23 (1941), pp. 113-28.
Galeani Napione, Gianfrancesco, DelTuso e dei pregi della lingua italiana (Turin,
## I79i)-
Galiani, Ferdinando, Deldialetto napoletano (Naples, 1779).
Garavini, Fausta, and Lucia Lazzerini (eds.), Macaroneeprovenzali (Milan-Naples,
## 1984) .
Garcia, Carlos, La oposicion y conjunction de los dos grandes luminares de la tierra,
0 la antipatia de franceses y espaholes (1617: ed. Michel Bareau, Edmonton,
## 079) •
Garcia Carcel, Ricardo, Historia de Cataluha: siglos xvi—xvii (Barcelona,
## 1985) .
Gardy, Philippe, La legon de Nerac (Bordeaux, 1999).
Garner, Bryan A., ‘Shakespeare’s Latinate Neologisms’, Shakespeare Studies 15
(1982), pp. 149-70.
Geckeler, Horst, et al. (eds.), Logos Semantikos (Berlin, 1981).
Gelli, Giambattista, Capricci del bottaio (Florence, 1546).
Gellner, Ernest, Nations and Nationalism (London, 1983).
Gesner, Conrad, Mithridates (Zurich, 1555).
Giesecke, Michael, Der Buchdruck in der friihen Neuzeit (Frankfurt, 1991).
Giles, Peter, ‘Dialect in Literature’, in The Scottish Tongue (London, 1924),
pp. 91-123.
Gill, Alexander, Logonomia anglica (1619: ed. and trans. Bror Danielsson and Arvid
## Gabrielson, Stockholm, 1972).
Ginzburg, Carlo, Cheese and Worms (1976: English translation, London,
## 1980).
Gneuss, Helmut, ‘The Origin of Standard Old English’, Anglo-Saxon England 1
(1972), pp. 63-83.
Golinski, Jan, ‘The Chemical Revolution and the Politics of Language’, Eighteenth
Century 33 (1992), pp. 238-51.
Gorlach, Manfred, Introduction to Early Modern English (1978: English translation,
## Cambridge, 1991).
Gray, Edward G., New World Babel: Languages and Nations in Early America
(Princeton, 1999).
Gray, Edward G., and Norman Fiering (eds.). The Language Encounter in the
Americas, 1492-1800 (New York, 2000).
Grayson, Cecil, A Renaissance Controversy, Latin or Italian (Oxford, 1959).
Green, Janet M., ‘Queen Elizabeth Is Latin reply to the Polish Ambassador’,
Sixteenth-Century Journal 31 (2000), pp. 987-1006.
Grillo, Ralph, Dominant Languages: Language and Hierarchy in Britain and France
(Cambridge, 1989).
Groeneboer, Kees, Gateway to the West: the Dutch Language in Colonial Indonesia,
1600-1990: a History of Language Policy (1993: English translation, Amsterdam,
## 1998).
Guiraud, Pierre, Les mots Strangers (Paris, 1965).

i86
## Bibliography
Guirarte, Guillermo L., ‘La dimension imperial del espanol en laobra de Aldrete’, in
Antonio Quilis and Hans-Juergen Niederehe (eds.), The History of Linguistics
in Spain (Amsterdam and Philadelphia, 1986), pp. 129—81.
Gustafsson, Harald, ‘Att gora svenskar av danskar? Den svenska integrationspoli-
tikens forestallningsvarld 1658-93’, in his Da Ostdanmark blev Sydsverige
## (forthcoming).
Gutierrez, Asensio, La France et les frangais dans la literature espagnole: un aspect de
la xenophobie en Espagne 1598-1665 (St-Etienne, 1977).
Hall, Robert A., Jr, The Italian Questione della Lingua (Chapel Hill, 1942).
Hall, Robert A., Jr, ‘Thorstein Veblen and Linguistic Theory’, American Speech 35
(i960), pp. 124-30.
Halleux, Pierre, ‘Le purisme islandais’, Etudes Germaniques 20 (1965), pp. 417—27.
Hammar, Elisabet, L 'enseignement du frangais en Suede jusqu’en 1807 (Stockholm,
## 1980).
Hanssens, Giovanni Michele, ‘Lingua liturgica’, in Enciclopedia Cattolica (Vatican
City, 1951), vol. vii, columns 1377-82.
Hare, John, St Edwards Ghost: or, Anti-Normanisme (London, 1647).
Harris-Northall, Ray, ‘Printed Books and Linguistic Standardization in Spain’,
Romance Philology 50 (1996), pp. 123-46.
Haugen, Einar, Language Conflict and Language Planning (Cambridge, MA,
## 1966).
Haugen, Einar, The Ecology of Language (Stanford, 1972).
Haugen, Einar, The Scandinavian Languages: an Introduction to their History
(London, 1976).
Hausmann, Frank-Rutger, Bibliographic der deutschen Ubersetzungen aus dem ital-
ienischen bis 1750, 2 vols. (Tubingen, 1992).
Hay, Denys, The Church in Italy in the Fifteenth Century (Cambridge, 1977).
Hazard, Paul, The European Mind, 1680—1715 (1935: English translation, London,
## 1953)-
Head, Randolph C., ‘A Plurilingual Family in the Sixteenth Century’, Sixteenth-
Century Journal 26 (1995), pp. 577-93.
Heath, Shirley, Telling Tongues: Language Policy in Mexico, Colony to Nation (New
## York, 1972).
Heere, Lucas de, Beschrijving der Britsche Eilanden (Antwerp, 1937).
Herder, Johann Gottfried, Sdmtliche Werke, ed. Bernard Suphan, 33 vols.
(Hildesheim, 1877-1913).
Herskovits, Melville J., and Frances S. Herskovits, Suriname Folklore (New York,
## 1936).
Hexter, Jack, Reappraisals in History (London, 1961).
Heyd, Uriel, Language Reform in Modern Turkey (Jerusalem, 1954).
Higonnet, Patrice, ‘The Politics ol Linguistic Terrorism’, Social History 5 (1980),
pp. 41-69.
Hill, Christopher, Puritanism and Revolution (London, 1958).
Hill, Christopher, Intellectual Origins of the English Revolution (Oxford, 1965).
Hill, Christopher, The World Turned Upside Down (London, 1972).

## Bibliography 187
Hobsbawm, Eric, Nations and Nationalism since 1/80: Progress, Myth, Reality
(Cambridge, 1990).
Hodermann, Richard, Universitdtsvorlesungen in deutscher Sprache um die Wende
des iy. Jahrhunderts (Jena, 1891).
Holberg, Ludvig, Memoirs, ed. and trans. Stewart E. Fraser (Leiden, 1970).
Holm, John A., Pidgins and Creoles, 2 vols. (Cambridge, 1988).
Holmes, Janet, Women, Men and Politeness (London, 1995).
Hope, Thomas E., Lexical Borrowing in the Romance Languages, 2 vols. (Oxford,
## 1971).
Howell, James, Ecclesiastical Affairs, vol. m (London, 1685).
Howell, Robert B., ‘The Low Countries’, in Barbour and Carmichael, Language
and Nationalism, pp. 130—50.
Huffines, Marion L., ‘Sixteenth-Century Printers and the Standardization of
New High German’, Journal of English and Germanic Philology 73 (1974),
pp. 60-72.
Huizinga, Johan, Men and Ideas (New York, 1959).
Hull, Geoffrey, ‘Maltese, from Arabic Dialect to European Language’, in Fodor
and Hagege, Language Reform, vol. vx, pp. 331—46.
Hunt, Lynn, Politics, Culture and Class in the French Revolution (Berkeley, 1984).
Hiittl-Worth, Gerta, Foreign Words in Russian: A Flistorical Sketch, 1550—1800
(Berkeley, 1963).
Iglesias, Ignasi, La llengua del Rossello, 1659—iy8p (Vic, 1998).
Ijsewijn, Jozef, ‘Neolatin: a Historical Survey’, Helios 14 no. 2 (1987), pp. 93-107.
Innis, Harold, The Bias of Communications (Toronto, 1951).
Irvine, Judith, and Susan Gal, ‘Language Ideology and Linguistic Differentiation’,
in Kroskrity, Regimes, pp. 35-84.
Jacobs, Willis D., William Barnes, Linguist (Albuquerque, 1952).
Jahr, Ernst H. (ed.), Language Change: Advances in Historical Sociolinguistics (Berlin,
## 1999)-
Jeanneret, Michel, A Feast of Words: Banquets and Table Talk in the Renaissance
(1987: English translation, Cambridge, 1991).
Jeffreys, Michael, ‘Adamantios Korais: Language and Revolution’, in Roland Sussex
andj. Christopher Eade (eds.), Culture and Nationalism in Nineteenth-Century
Eastern Europe (Columbus, Ohio, 1983), pp. 42-55.
Jenkins, Geraint H. (ed.), The Welsh Language before the Industrial Revolution
(Cardiff, 1997).
Jernudd, Bjorn, and Michael Shapiro (eds.), The Politics of Language Purism (Berlin,
## 1989).
Jespersen, Otto, Growth and Structure of the English Language (Leipzig, 1905).
Johnson, Samuel, Plan of a Dictionary (London, 1747).
Johnson, Samuel, A Dictionary of the English Language (London, 1755).
Jones, Cohn, ‘Plague and its Metaphors in Early Modern France’, Representations
53 (1996), pp. 97-127.
Jones, R. Brinley, The Old British Tongue: the Vernacular in Wales, 1540-1640
(Cardiff, 1970).

i88
## Bibliography
Jones, Richard F., Triumph of the English Language (Stanford, 1953).
Jones, William J., A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary 1575—
1648 (Berlin, 1976).
Jonson, Ben, Timber or Discoveries (1641: ed. Ralph S. Walker, Syracuse, 1953).
Jorder, Otto, Die Forme des Sonetts bei Lope de Vega (Halle, 1936).
Joseph, John E., Eloquence and Power: the Rise of Language Standards and Standard
Languages (Oxford, 1987).
Joseph, John E., and Talbot J. Taylor (eds.), Ideologies of Language (London,
## 1990).
Jouanna, Arlette, L’idee de race en France, 1498—1614 (Paris, 1976).
Juste, Theodore, La Revolution des Pays-Bas sous Philippe II (Paris, 1860—3).
Kajanto, Iiro, ‘The Position of Latin in Eighteenth-Century Finland’, in Pierre
Tuynman et al. (eds.), Acta Conventus Neo-Latini Amstelodamensis (Munich,
1979). PP- 93_i°6-
Karpat, Kemal H., ‘A Language in Search of a Nation: Turkish in the Nation-State’,
in Scaglione, Emergence, pp. 175-208.
Kazazis, Kostas, ‘Dismantling Modern Greek Diglossia: the Aftermath’, Lingua e
Stile 36 (2001), pp. 291-8.
Kelley, Donald, Foundations of Modern Historical Thought (New York, 1970).
Kelly, John N. D., Jerome: His Life, Writings and Controversies (London, 1975).
Kettmann, Gerhard, Die kursachischeKanzleisprachezwischen i486undr546 (Berlin,
## 1967).
Key, Mary R., Catherine the Great’s Linguistic Contribution (Carbondale and
## Edmonton, 1980).
Kiernan, Victor, ‘Languages and Conquerors’, in Burke and Porter, Language, Self,
pp. 191-210.
Kirkness, Alan, Zur Sprachreinigung in Deutschen: eine historische Dokumentation
1789-1871 (Tubingen, 1975).
Kirkness, Alan, ‘Das Phanomen des Purismus in der Geschichte des Deutschen’,
in Besch, Sprachgeschichte, pp. 290—9.
Klein, Lawrence E., Shaftesbury and the Culture of Politeness (Cambridge, 1994).
Knowlson, James, Universal Language Schemes in England and France, 1600—1800
(Toronto, 1975).
Koselleck, Reinhart, Futures Past (1979: English translation, Cambridge, MA, 1985).
Kristeller, Paul, ‘The Origin and Development of the Language of Italian Prose’,
in his Renaissance Thought, vol. n (New York, 1965), pp. 119-41.
Kroskrity, Paul V. (ed.), Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Polities and Identities (Santa
Fe and Oxford), 2000.
Kullberg, N. A. (ed.), Svenska Riksrddets Protokoll (Stockholm, 1878).
Lafont, Robert, Renaissance du Sud, essai sur Lt litterature occitane au temps de Henri
IV (Paris, 1970).
Lambley, Kathleen, The leaching and Cultivation of the French Language in England
during Tudor and Stuart Times (Manchester and London), 1920.
Langeli, Attilio Bartoli, La scrittura dell’italiano (Bologna, 2000).
Langer, August, Der Wortschatz des deutschen Pietismus (Tubingen, 1954).

## Bibliography 189
Lartichaux, Jean-Yves, ‘Linguistic Politics during the French Revolution’, Diogenes
## 97 (1977)3 PP- 65-84.
Lass, Roger (ed.), The Cambridge History of the English Language, vol. 111,I4y6—iyy6
(Cambridge, 1999).
Lasso, Orlando di, Briefe, ed. Horst Leuchtmann (Wiesbaden, 1977).
Lathuillere, Roger, Lapreciosite (Geneva, 1966).
Laven, Mary, Virgins of Venice (2002: second ed., London, 2003).
Lazzerini, Lucia, ‘Per latinos grossos: studio sui sermoni mescidati’, Studi di Filolo-
gia Italiana 29 (1971), pp. 219—339.
Lazzerini, Lucia, ‘Aux origines du macaronique’. Revue des langues romanes 86
(1982), pp. 11-33.
Le Bras, Herve, and Emmanuel Todd, L’invention de la France (Paris, 1981).
Lehmann, Paul, ‘Mittelalter und Kuchenlatein’ (1928: repr. in his Erforschung des
Mittelalters, 5 vols., Leipzig, 1941), vol. 1, pp. 46-61.
Leith, David, A Social History of English (1983: second ed., London, 1997).
Lentner, Leopold, Volksprache und Sakralsprache: Geschichte einer Lebensfrage bis
zum Ende des Konzil von Trient (Vienna, 1964).
Leopold I, Korrespondence, ed. Zdenek Kalista (Prague, 1936).
Le Page, Robert, and Andree Tabouret-Keller, Acts of Identity (Cambridge, 1985).
Lerbom, Jens, Mellan tva riken: Integration, Politisk kultur och fornationella iden-
titeterpa Gotland 1300—iyoo (Lund, 2003).
Le Roy, Louis, Vicissitudes (Paris, 1575).
Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel, Lespaysans de Languedoc (Paris, 1966).
Levy, Paul, La langue allemande en France, vol. 1, Des origines a 1830 (Lyon, 1950).
Lewicka, Halina, ‘Le melange des langues dans l’ancien theatre du Midi de la
France’, Melanges Jean Boutiere, 2 vols. (Liege, 1971), vol. 1, pp. 347-59.
Lindberg, Bo, De lardes modersmal (Goteborg, 1984).
Lindberg, Bo, Europa och Latinet (Stockholm, 1993).
Llwyd, Edward, Archaeologia Britannica (London, 1707).
Loccenius, Johan, Historiae Suecanae (Stockholm, 1676).
Lockhart, James, The Nahua after the Conquest (Stanford, 1992).
Lockwood, William B., A Panorama of the Indo-European Languages (London,
## I972-)-
Loomis, Louise R., ‘Nationality at the Council of Constance’, American Historical
Review 44 (1940), pp. 508-27.
Loonen, Petrus L. M., For to Learne to Buye and Sell: Learning English in the Low
Dutch Area between 1300 and 1800 (Amsterdam-Maarssen, 1991).
Lusignan, Serge, Purler vulgairement: les intellects Is et la Langue frangaise aux i3e et
14c siecles (Montreal and Paris, 1986).
Luther, Martin, Tisch-Reden, 5 vols. (Weimar, 1912).
Lyons, Martyn, ‘Politics and Patois-, the Linguistic Policy of the French Revolution’,
Australian Journal of French Studies (1981), pp. 264-81.
McArthur, Tom, The English Languages (Cambridge, 1998).
McClure, J. Derrick, ‘English in Scotland’, Cambridge History of the English
Language, vol. v (Cambridge, 1994)3 PP- 23~93-

## 190 Bibliography
MacDonald, Robert H. (ed.), William Drummond: Poems and Prose, Edinburgh,
## 19?6'
Malkiel, Yakov, ‘A Linguist’s View of the Standardization of a Dialect’, in Scaglione,
Emergence, pp. 51-73.
Mamcarz, Irena, ‘Aicuni aspetti della questione della lingua in Polonia nel ’500’, in
Riccardo Picchio (ed.), Studi sulla questione della linguapressogli slavi (Rome,
1972), pp. 279-326.
Mannheim, Bruce, The Language of the Inka since the European Invasion (Austin,
## I99I).
Marazzini, Claudio, Storia e coscienza della lingua in Italia dall’umanesimo alroman-
ticismo (Turin, 1989).
Marfany, Joan-Lluis, La llengua maltractada: El castella i el catala a Catalunya del
segle xvi alsegle xix (Barcelona, 2001).
Marnef, Guido, Antwerp in the Age of Reformation: Underground Protestantism in
a Commercial Metropolis 1550-77 (Baltimore, 1996).
Martel, Antoine, Michel Lomonosov et la langue litteraire russe (Paris, 1933).
Martel, Antoine, La langue polonaise dans les pays ruthenes, Ukraine etRussie Blanche,
1567-1667 (Lille, 1938).
Martin, Henri-Jean, Print, Power and People in 17th-Century France (1969: English
translation, Metuchen, NJ, and London, 1993).
Martinell Gifre, Emma and Mar Cruz Pinol (eds.), La consciencia lingulstica en
Europa (Barcelona, 1996).
Mattheier, Klaus J., ‘Nationalsprachentwicklung, Sprachenstandardisierung und
historische Soziolinguistik’, Sociolinguistica 2 (1988), pp. 1—9.
Mattingly, Garrett, Renaissance Diplomacy (London, 1955).
Mauro, Tullio De, Storia linguistica dell'Italia unita (1963: revised ed., Rome, 1991).
Mayenowa, Maria R., ‘Aspects of the Language Question in Poland’, in Picchio
and Goldblatt, Aspects, pp. 337-76.
Megged, Amos, Exporting the Catholic Reformation: Local Religion in Early Colonial
Mexico (Leiden, 1996).
Meillet, P J. Antoine, Linguistique historique et linguistiquegenerale, 2 vols. (Paris,
## 1921-38).
Menendez Pidal, Ramon, ‘La lengua en tiempo de los Reyes Catolicos’, Cuadernos
Hispanoamericanos 13 (1950), pp. 9-24.
Metcalf, George J., ‘Abraham Mylius on Historical Linguistics’, Publications of the
Modern Language Association 68 (1953), pp. 535—54.
Metcalf, George J., ‘The Indo-European Hypothesis in the Sixteenth and Seven¬
teenth Centuries’, in Dell Hymes (ed.), Studies in the History of Linguistics
(Bloomington, 1974), pp. 233-57.
Mietzsche, Alfred [‘Frido Metsk ], 'Der Entstehung der obersorbischen Schrift-
sprache (1668-1728), Zeitschrififur Slavische Philobgie 28 (i960), pp. 122-48.
Migliorini, Bruno, Saggi linguistic! (Florence, 1956).
Mignolo, Walter D., ‘On the Colonization of Amerindian Languages and
Memories’, Comparative Studies in Society and History 34 (1992), pp. 301-
## 30.

## Bibliography 191
Milhou, Alain, ‘Les politiques de la langue a l’epoque moderne de l’Europe et
l’Amerique’, in Benassy-Berling, Clement and Milhou, Langues et cultures,
pp. 15-40.
Miller, Peter, Peiresc’s Europe (New Haven, 2000).
Milo, Daniel, ‘La bourse mondiale de la traduction: un barometre culturel?’
Annales: economies, societes, civilisations 39 (1984), pp. 93—115.
Milroy, James, Linguistic Variation and Change (London, 1992).
Milroy, James, ‘Toward a Speaker-Based Account of Language Change’, in Jahr,
Language Change, pp. 21—36.
Mirambel, Andre, ‘Les aspects psychologiques du purisme dans la Grece moderne’,
Journal de Psychologie (1964), pp. 405—36.
Mirchell, Linda C., Grammar Wars: Language as Cultural Battlefield in ijth- and
18th-Century England (Aldershot, 2001).
Mohrmann, Christine, Die altchristliche Sondersprache in den Sermones des hi
Augustin (Nijmegen, 1932).
Mohrmann, Christine, Latin vulgaire, Latin des chretiens, Latin medieval (Paris,
## 1955)-
Moliere, Jean-Baptiste, Les Precieuses Ridicules, ed. Micheline Cuenin (Geneva,
l973)-
Mongin, Edme, Oraison funebre de Louis le Grand (Paris, 1715).
Morson, Gary S., and Caryl Emerson, Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosaics
(Stanford, 1990).
Moryson, Fynes, Shakespeare’s Europe (London, 1903).
Mosse, Fernand, Esquisse d’une histoire de la langue anglaise (Lyon, 1947).
Mugglestone, Lynda, ‘Talking Proper’: The Rise of Accent as Social Symbol (Oxford,
## 1995)-
Mul caster, Richard, The First Part of the Elementarie (1582: facsimile repr., Menston,
## 1970).
Mulertt, Werner, ‘Aus der Geschichte der Spanische Sprachreinigungsbestrebun-
gen’, Estudios Adolfo Bonilla (Madrid, 1927), vol. 1, pp. 583-603.
Nadal, Josep M., ‘El catala en els segles xvi i xvii’, L’Avern; 100 (1987), pp. 24-31.
Naro, Anthony J., ‘A Study on the Origins of Pidginisation’, Language 54 (1978),
pp. 314-47-
Nebrija, Antonio, Gramdtica de la lengua castellana (1492: ed. Antonio Quilis,
## Madrid, 1989).
Neri, Ferdinando, Letteratura e legende (Milan, 1951).
Nettle, Daniel, and Suzanne Romaine, Vanishing Voices (London, 2000).
Nevaainen, Terttu, ‘Lexis and Semantics’, in Lass, Cambridge History, pp. 332-458-
Niederehe, Hans-Josef, Die SprachauffassungAlfons des Weisen (Tubingen, 1975).
Nordstrom, Johan, De Yverborenes O (Stockholm, 1934).
Notestein, Wallace (ed.), Commons Debates 1621, vol. 2 (New Haven, 1935).
Nunes de Leao, Duarte, Ortografia (1576) and Origem de lingua portuguesa (1606), in
Maria Leonor Carvalhao Buescu (ed.), Ortografia e origem da lingua portuguesa
(Lisbon, 1983).
Ohlsson, Stig, Skdnes sprdkliga forsvenskning, 2 vols. (Lund, 1978).

## 192 Bibliography
Oksaar, Els, ‘Social Networks, Communicative Acts and the Multilingual
Individual’, in Jahr, Language Change, pp. 3-19.
Opitz, Martin, Gesammelte Werke (Stuttgart, 1968).
Ormsby-Lennon, Hugh, ‘From Shibboleth to Apocalypse: Quaker Speechways
during the Puritan Revolution’, in Burke and Porter, Language, Self,
pp. 72-112.
Ortiz, Fernando, Cuban Counterpoint (1940: English translation, New York, 1947).
Paccagnella, Ivano, ‘Mescidanza e macaronismo’, Giornale Storico della Letteratura
Italiana 150 (1973), pp. 363-81.
Paccagnella, Ivano, II fasto delle lingue: plurilinguismo letterario nel '500 (Rome,
## 1984).
Padley, G. Arthur, Grammatical Theory in Western Europe 1500—1700, vol. 11
(Cambridge, 1988).
Padoan, Giorgio, La commedia rinascimentale veneta (Vicenza, 1982).
Palmer, Patricia, Language and Conquest in Early Modern Ireland (Cambridge,
## 2001).
Paoli, Ugo E., // latino maccheronico (Florence, 1959).
Parker, Geoffrey, The Spanish Road (Cambridge, 1972).
Parkes, Malcolm B., Pause and Effect: an Introduction to the History of Punctuation
in the West (Aldershot, 1992).
Pasek, Jan, Pamiftnik (Cracow, 1929).
Pasquier, Etienne, Recherches de la France (Paris, 1566).
Pastor, Jose Francisco (ed.), Las apologias de la lengua castellana en el siglo de oro
(Madrid, 1929).
Peiresc, Nicholas-Claude Fabri de, Lettres, ed. Philippe Tamizey de Larroque,
7 vols. (Paris 1888-98).
Peletier du Mans, Jacques, L’artpoetique (1555: ed. Andre Boulanger, Paris, 1930).
Percival, W. Keith, ‘La connaissance des langues du monde’, in Auroux, idees
linguistiques, vol. 11, pp. 226—38.
Perion, Joachim, De linguaegallicae origine (Paris, 1554).
Pettegree, Andrew, Emden and the Dutch Revolt (Oxford, 1992).
Peyre, Henri, La royaute et les languesprovinciales (Paris, 1933).
Pfeiffer, Rudolf, ‘Kiichenlatein’ (1931: repr. his Ausgeivdhlte Schriften, Munich,
i960), pp. 183-7.
Phillipps, Kenneth C., Language and Class in Victorian England (London, 1984).
Picchio, Luciana Stegagno, ‘La questione della lingua in Portogallo', in Joao Barros,
Dialogo (1540: new ed., Modena, 1959), pp. 5—54.
Picchio, Riccardo (ed.), Studi sulla questione della lingua presso gli slavi (Rome,
## 1972).
Picchio, Riccardo, and Harvey Goldblatt (eds.), Aspects of the Slavic Language
Question, 2 vols. (New Haven, 1984).
Pimentel Pinto, Edith, ‘O portugues no Brasil: 6poca colonial’, in Ana Pizarro (ed.),
America Latina: Palavra, Literatura, Cultura (Sao Paulo, 1993), pp. 515—26.
Pittock, Murray G. H., The Invention of Scotland (London, 1991).

## 193
## Bibliography
Polenz, Peter von, ‘Sprachpurismus und Nationalsozialismus’, in Eberhard
Lammert (ed.), Germanistik (Frankfurt, 1967), pp. 113-65.
Pontano, Giovanni, De sermone, ed. Alessandra Mantovani (Rome, 2002).
Postel, Guillaume, Origines hebraicae linguae (Paris, 1538).
Poullet, Edmond (ed.), Correspondance du cardinal de Granvelle (Brussels, 1877).
Pozzi, Mario, ‘II pensiero linguistico di Vincenzo Borghini’, Giornale Storico della
Letteratura Italiana 88 (1971), pp. 216-94.
Prestwich, Michael, R. H. Britnell and Robin Frame (eds.), Thirteenth-Century
England (Woodbridge, 1989).
Price, Glanville (ed.), Encyclopaedia of the Languages of Europe (Oxford, 1998).
Price, Mary B., and Lawrence M. Price, The Publication of English Literature in
Germany in the Eighteenth Century (Berkeley, 1934).
Prosperi, Adriano, Tribunali di Coscienza (Turin, 1996).
Puppo, Mario (ed.), Discussioni linguistiche del poo (Turin, 1957).
Puttenham, George, The Arte of English Poesie (1588: ed. Gladys D. Willcock and
## Alice Walker, Cambridge, 1936).
Quevedo, Francisco de, Obras en Prosa (Madrid, 1941).
Quilis, Antonio, ‘Le sort de l’espagnol au Philippines: un probleme de langues en
contact’, Revue Linguistique Romane 44 (1980), pp. 82-107.
Quintilian, De Oratore (Cambridge, MA, 2001).
Raes, Alphonsus, Lntroductio in liturgiam orientalem (Rome, 1947).
Ramson, William S. (ed.), English Transported (Canberra, 1970).
Read, Allen W., American Projects for an Academy to Regulate Speech’, Publica¬
tions of the Modern Language Association 51 (1936), pp. 1141-79.
Read, Allen W., ‘The Assimilation of the Speech of British Immigrants in Colonial
America \ Journal of English and Germanic Philology 37 (1938), pp. 70—9.
Renzi, Lorenzo, La politica linguistica della rivoluzione francese (Naples, 1981).
Reuchlin, Johann, De rudimentis hebraicis (Pforzheim, 1506).
Ribeiro Chiado, Antonio, Auto das regateiras, ed. Giulia Lanciani (Rome, 1970).
Richardson, Brian, ‘Gli italiani e il toscano parlato nel ’500’, Lingua Nostra 48
(1987), pp. 97-107.
Richardson, Brian, Print Culture in Renaissance Italy: the Editor and the Vernacular
Text, 1470-1600 (Cambridge, 1994).
Richardson, Brian, ‘La riforma ortograhca dal 1501 al 1533’, in Mirko Tavoni (ed.),
Italia e Europa (Ferrara, 1996), pp. 257-66.
Richardson, Malcolm, ‘Flenry V, the English Chancery and Chancery English’,
Speculum 55 (1980), pp. 726-50.
Richter, Michael, Studies in Medieval Language and Culture (Dublin, 1995).
Rico, Francisco, Nebrijafrente a los barbaros (Salamanca, 1978).
Ridder-Symoens, ETilde de (ed.), A History of the University in Europe, vol. 1
(Cambridge, 1992).
Riemens, Kornelis J., Esquisse historique de Penseignement du frangais en Hollande
du i6e au ige siecle (Leiden, 1919).
Rist, Johann, Rettungder edlen Teutschen Hauptsprache (Hamburg, 1642).

## 194 Bibliography
Rivarol, Antoine, De I’universalite de la langue frangaise (1786: ed. T. Suran, Paris,
## 1930).
Roberts, Michael, Gustavus Adolphus, vol. 11, 1626—32 (London, 1958).
Roberts, Michael, The Early Vasas: a History of Sweden, 1323-1611 (Cambridge,
## 1968).
Roberts, Michael, The Swedish Imperial Experience, 1360—1/18 (Cambridge, 1979).
Roberts, Peter R., ‘The Welsh Language, English Law and Tudor Legislation’,
Transactions Cymmrodorion (1989), pp. 19-75.
Robinson, Philip, ‘The Scots Language in Seventeenth-Century Ulster’, Ulster
Folklife 35 (1989), pp. 86-99.
Rodrigues, Jose Honorio, ‘The Victory of the Portuguese Language in Colonial
Brazil', in Alfred Hower and Richard A. Preto-Rodas (eds.), Empire in Tran¬
sition (Gainsville, 1985), pp. 32-64.
Rossing-Hager, Monika, ‘Kiichenlatein und Sprachpurismus im frtihen 16. Jht’,
in Nikolaus Henkel and Nigel F. Palmer (eds.), Latein und Volksprache im
deutschen Mittelalter, 1100-1300 (Tubingen, 1992), pp. 360-86.
Rogger, Hans, National Consciousness in Eighteenth-Century Russia (Cambridge,
MA, i960).
Romaine, Suzanne, Socio-historicalLinguistics (Cambridge, 1982).
Rosenblat, Angel, Los conquistadoresy su Lengua (Caracas, 1977).
Rosetti, Alexandru, ‘Langue mixte et melange de langues’, Acta Linguistica 5 (1945),
## PP- 73-9-
Rousseau, Andre, Sur les traces de Busbecq et le Gothique (Lille, 1991).
Rowe, John H., ‘Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century Grammars’, in Dell Hymes
(ed.), Studies in the History of Linguistics (Bloomington, 1974), pp. 361—79.
Russell, Joycelyne G., Diplomats at Work: Three Renaissance Studies (Stroud, 1992).
Rydberg, Sven, Svenska Studieresor till England under Frihetstiden (Uppsala, 1951).
Sahlins, Peter, Boundaries-, the Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees (Berkeley,
## 1989).
Saint-Simon, Louis de, Memoires, ed. Yves Coirault, 8 vols. (Paris, 1983—8).
Salmon, Vivian, The Works of Francis Lodwick (London, 1972).
Salmon, Vivian, ‘Orthography and Punctuation’, in Lass, Cambridge History of the
English Language, vol. hi, pp. 13-55.
Sanders, Hanne, ‘Religiost eller nationalt verdensbillede? Skane efter overgangen
til Sverige i 1658’, in Sanders (ed.), Mellem Cud og Djaevalen: Religiose og
magiske verdensbillede i Norden 1300—1800 (Copenhagen, 2001), pp. 231—52.
Sanders, Willy, Sachsensprache, Hansesprache, Plattdeutsch: Sprachgeschichtliche
Grundzuge des Niederdeutschen (Gottingen, 1982).
Santesson, Lillemor, ‘Ecclesiastical History III: Luther’s Reformation’, in Bandle,
Nordic Languages, pp. 412—24.
Saumaise, Claude de, Hellenistica (Leiden, 1643).
Sauvageot, Aurelien, L’elaboration de la languefitmoise (Paris, 1973).
Sauvageot, Aurelien, 'Le finnois de Finlande’, in Fodor and Hagege, Language
Reform, vol. in, pp. 173-90.
Scaglione, Aldo (ed.), The Emergence of National Languages (Ravenna, 1984).

## 195
## Bibliography
Schama, Simon, The Embarrassment of Riches (London, 1987).
Schenker, Alexander M., and Edward Stankiewicz (eds.), The Slavic Literary
Languages: Formation and Development (New Haven, 1980).
Schiewe, Jurgen, Sprachpurismus und Emanzipation: J. H. Campes Verdeutschungs-
programm (Hildesheim, 1988).
Schiewe, Jurgen, Die Macht der Sprache: Eine Geschichte der Sprachlichkeit von der
Antike bis zur Gegenwart (Munich, 1998).
Schmalstieg, William R., An Old Prussian Grammar (University Park, MD,
## 1974)-
Schmidt, Herman, Liturgie et langue vulgaire: Le probleme de la langue liturgique
chez les premiers Reformateurs et au Concile de Trente (Rome, 1950).
Schottenloher, Karl, Die Buchdruckertatigkeit Georg Erlingers in Bamberg (Leipzig,
## 1907).
Schrijnen, Josef, Cbarakteristik des altchristlichen Latein (Nijmegen, 1932).
Schroder, Konrad (ed.), Fremdsprachenunterricht 1500—1800 (Wiesbaden, 1992).
Schulenberg, Sigrid von der, ‘Leibnizens Gedanken zur Erforschung der deutschen
Mundarten’, Abhandlungen des Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften
(i937) 1 PP- 3-37-
Schulenberg, Sigrid von der, Leibniz als Spracbforscher (Frankfurt, 1973).
Schultz, Hans Martin, Die Bestrebungen der Sprachgesellschaften des xvii Jhts fur
Reinigung der deutschen Sprache (1888: repr. Leipzig, 1975).
Scott, Mary Augusta, Elizabethan Translations from the Ltalian (Boston, 1916).
Seiffel, L., ‘J- G. Schottelius and the Traditions of German Linguistic Purism’,
in Werner Hiillen (ed.), Historiography of Linguistics (Munster, 1990),
pp. 241-61.
Seip, Didrik A., Dansk og Norsk i Norge i eldre tider (Oslo, 1932).
Seip, Didrik A., Norwegische Sprachgeschichte (Berlin, 1971).
Serianni, Luca, ‘La lingua del Seicento: espansione del modello unitario, resistenze
ed esperimenti centrifughi’, in Enrico Malato (ed.), Storia della letteratura
italiana, vol. v (Rome, 1997), pp. 561-96.
Sgard, Jean (ed.), Dictionnaire des journaux, 1600—1789, 2 vols. (Paris, 1976).
Sheridan, Thomas, A Course of Lectures on Elocution (London, 1762).
Sicroff, Albert A., Les controverses des statuts de ‘purete de sang en Espagne aux i6e et
iye siecles (Paris, i960).
Silverstein, Michael, ‘Whorfianism and the Linguistic Imagination of Nationality’,
in Kroskrity, Regimes, pp. 85-138.
Skautrup, Peter, Det danske sprogs histone, 5 vols. (Copenhagen, 1944-70).
Skippon, Philip ‘An Account of a Journey’, in Awnsley and John Churchill (eds.),
A Collection of Voyages, 6 vols. (London, 1732), vol. vi.
Slaughter, Mary M., Universal Languages and Scientific Taxonomy in the Seventeenth
Century (Cambridge, 1982).
Solomon, Howard M., Public Welfare, Science and Propaganda in Seventeenth-
Century France (Princeton, 1972).
Somaize, Antoine Baudeau de, Leprocez despretieuses, ed. Elisa Biancardi (Rome,
## 1980).

## 196 Bibliography
Sommervogel, Carlos, etal., Bibliotheque de la CompagniedeJesus, 12 vols. (Brussels,
## 1890-1932).
Sori, Ercole, La citta e i rifiuti (Bologna, 2001).
Spengler, Walter E., Johann Fischart (Goppingen, 1969).
Spenser, Edmund, A View of the Present State of Ireland, ed. William L. Renwick
(Oxford, 1970).
Speroni, Sperone, Dialogo della lingua (1542: ed. Helene Harth, Munich, 1975).
## Spieghel, Hendrik L., Tweespraak (1584: Groningen, 1913).
Stang, Christian S., Die west-russische Kanzleisprache des Grossfurstentums Litauen
(Oslo, 1935).
Stankiewicz, Edward, ‘The “Genius” of Language in Sixteenth-Century Linguis¬
tics’, in Geckeler, Logos, vol. 1, pp. 177-89.
Stearns, Macdonald, Crimean Gothic: Analysis and Etymology of the Corpus
(Saratoga, CA, 1978).
Stein, Gabriele, John Palsgrave as Renaissance Linguist (Oxford, 1997).
Steinberg, Sigfrid H., Five Hundred Years of Printing (1955: revised ed., Harmonds-
worth, 1961).
Steiner, George, After Babel (Oxford, 1975).
Stevenson, Jane, ‘Women and Latin in Renaissance Europe’, Bulletin of the Society
for Renaissance Studies 19, no. 2 (2002), pp. 10—16.
Stevin, Simon, Works, vol. 1, ed. Eduard J. Dijksterhuis (Amsterdam, 1955).
Stiernhielm, Georg (ed.), Evangelia ab Ulfila, Stockholm, 1671.
Stock, Brian, The Implications of Literacy: Written Language and Models of Interpre¬
tation in the Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries (Princeton, 1983).
Stolt, Birgit, Die Sprachmischung in Luthers Tischreden (Stockholm, 1964).
Strassner, Erich, Deutsche Sprachkultur (Tiibingen, 1995).
Strumins’kyi, Bohdan, ‘The Language Question in the Ukrainian Lands before
the Nineteenth Century’, in Picchio and Goldblatt, Aspects, vol. 11, pp. 9—47.
Suggett, Helen, ‘The Use of French in England in the Later Middle Ages’, Trans¬
actions of the Royal Historical Society 28 (1946), pp. 61-84.
Swain, Simon, Hellenism and Empire: Language, Classicism and Power in the Greek
World, ad 50-250 (Oxford, 1996).
Symcox, Geoffrey, ‘The Savoyard State: a Negative Case-Study in the Politics of
Linguistic Unification’, in Chiappelli, Fairest Flower, pp. 185-91.
Taszycki, Witold, Obrohcy jqzyka polskiego (Wroclaw, 1953).
Tavoni, Mirko, Latino, grammatica, volgare (Padua, 1984).
Ternes, Elmar, ‘The Breton Language’, in Donald Macaulay (ed.), The Celtic
Languages (Cambridge, 1992), pp. 371-452.
Teyssier, Paul, La langue de Gil Vicente (Paris, 1959).
1 hiesse, Anne-Marie, La creation des identites nationales: Europe xviii—xx siecle
(Paris, 1999).
I hody, Philip, Franglais: Forbidden English, Forbidden American (London, 1995).
Thomas, George, Linguistic Purism (London, 1991).
Thomasius, Christian, Von Nachahmungder Franzosen (1687: repr. Stuttgart, 1894).
folomei, Claudio, De corruptis verbis (Siena, c. 1516).

## 197
## Bibliography
Tolomei, Claudio, II Cesano (1546: ed. Maria Rosa Franco Subri, Rome, 1975).
Toorians, Lauran, ‘Wizo Flandrensis and the Flemish Settlement in Pem¬
brokeshire’, Cambridge Medieval Celtic Studies 20 (1990), pp. 99—118.
Torres-Alcala, Antonio, Verbigratia: los escritores macarronicos de Espafia (Madrid,
## 1984).
Torres Naharro, Bartolome de, Obra Completa (Madrid, 1994).
Toth, Istvan G., Literacy and Written Culture in Early Modern Europe (1996: English
translation, Budapest, 2000).
Townson, Michael, Mother-Tongue and Fatherland (Manchester, 1992).
Trenard, Louis, ‘L’enseignement de la langue nationale: une reforme pedagogique,
1750—1790’, Reflexions historiques 7 (1990), pp. 95—114.
Trifone, Pietro, ‘La lingua e la stampa nel 500’, Storia della lingua Italiana, vol. 1
(Turin, 1993), pp. 425-46.
Trovato, Paolo, Con ogni diligenza corretto: la stampa e le revisioni editoriali dei testi
letterari italiani, i4yo—iyyo (Bologna, 1991).
Trudeau, Danielle, ‘L’ordonnance de Villers-Cotterets et la langue franfaise: his-
toire ou interpretation?’ Bibliotheque d’Humanisme et Renaissance 45 (1983),
pp. 461-72.
Trudgill, Peter, ‘Third-Person Singular Zero’ (1997: repr. Jacek Fisiak and Peter
Trudgill (eds.), East Anglian English, Cambridge, 2001), pp. 179-86.
Turtas, Raimondo, ‘La questione linguistica nei collegi gesuitici nella Sardegna
nella seconda meta del Cinquecento’, Quaderni sardi di storia 2 (1981),
pp. 55-86.
Twaddell, William F., ‘Standard German’, Anthropological Linguistics 1, no. 3 (1959),
## PP- 1-7-
Underdown, David, Pride’s Purge: Politics in the Puritan Revolution (Oxford,
## I971)-
Valdes, Juan de, Dialogo de la lengua (written c. 1536, published 1737: ed. Juan M.
## Lope Blanch, Madrid, 1969).
Vandenbussche, Wim, ‘Triglossia and Pragmatic Variety Choice in Nineteenth-
Century Bruges’, Journal of Historical Pragmatics 3 (2002).
Varchi, Benedetto, LErcolano (Venice, 1570).
Vaugelas, Claude de, Remarques sur la langue frangaise (Paris, 1647).
Veblen, Thorstein, The Theory of the Leisure Class (New York, 1899).
Verdenius, Andries A., Bredero’s Dialectkunst als Hollandse Reaktie tegen zuidneder-
landse taalhegemonie (Groningen, 1933).
Verdonk, Robert A., La lengua espahola en Flandes en el siglo xvii (Madrid,
## 1980).
Verstegan, Richard, Restitution of Decayed Intelligence (sine loco, 1605).
Vicente, Gil, Obras, 3 vols. (Coimbra, 1912-14).
Vigarello, Georges, Concepts of Cleanliness (1985: English translation, Cambridge,
## 1988).
Vikor, Lars S., ‘Northern Europe: Languages as Prime Markers of Ethnic and
National Identity’, in Barbour and Carmichael, Language and Nationalism,
pp.105-29.

## 198 Bibliography
Vinogradov, Vladimir V., The History of the Russian Literary Language from the
Seventeenth Century to the Nineteenth (1949: condensed adaptation, Madison,
## 1969).
Vitale, Maurizio, La lingua volgare della cancelleria viscontea-sforzesca nel ’400
(Varese-Milan, 1953).
Vitale, Maurizio, La questione della lingua (i960: revised ed., Palermo, 1984).
Vitale, Maurizio, ‘Purista e purismo’, Acme 17 (1964), pp. 187—211.
Vitale, Maurizio, ‘Discussioni linguistiche del ’700’, in Formigari, Teorie, pp. 11-36
Vitale, Maurizio, L 'oro nella lingua. Contributiper una storia del tradizionalismo e
del purismo italiano (Milan-Naples, 1986).
Viziana, Martin, Libro de alabangas de las lenguas castellanay valenciana (Valencia,
## 1574)-
Voloshinov, see Bakhtin.
Vooys, Cornelis G. N. de, Geschiedenis van de Nederlandse taal (1931: 5th ed.,
Antwerp and Groningen, 1952).
Voss, Gerard Jan, De vitiis sermonis (Amsterdam, 1645).
Vossler, Karl, Sprachgemeinschaft und Interessengemeinschafi (Munich, 1924).
Walker, L., ‘A Note on Historical Linguistics and Marc Bloch’s Comparative
Method’, History and Theory 19 (1980), pp. 154-64.
Wallenstein, Albrecht von, Briefe, ed. Ferdinand Tadra (Vienna, 1879).
Wallenstein, Albrecht von, Briefe, ed. Hermann Hallwich (Vienna, 1912).
Walsh, Paul, ‘The Irish Language and the Reformation’, Irish Theological Quarterly
15 (1920), pp. 239-50.
Waquet, Fran^oise, Latin: the Empire of a Sign (1998: English translation, London,
## 2001).
Waquet, Franfoise, Parler comme un livre (Paris, 2003).
Wardhaugh, Ronald, Languages in Competition (Oxford, 1987).
Waterman, John, A History of the German Language with Special Reference to the
Cultural and Social Forces that Shaped the Standard Literary Language (Seattle,
## 1966).
Webb, John, An Historical Essay Endeavouring a Probability that the Language of
the Empire of China is the Primitive Language (London, 1669).
Weinberg, Maria Beatriz Fontanella de, ‘La lengua espanola in America durante
el periodo colonial’, in Ana Pizarro (ed.), America Latina: palavra, literatura,
cultura (Sao Paulo, 1993), pp. 493—500.
Weinreich, Max, History of the Yiddish Language (1973: English translation,
## Chicago, 1980).
Weinrich, Harald, Wege der Sprachkultur {Stuttgart, 1985).
Weithase, Irmgard, Zur Geschichte der gesprochenen deutschen Sprache, vol. 1
(Tubingen, 1961).
Wenzel, Siegfried, Macaronic Sermons: Bilingualism and Preaching in Late Medieval
England (Ann Arbor, 1994).
Wermser, Richard, Statistische Studien zur Entwicklung des englischen Wortschatzes
(Bern, 1976).

## Bibliography 199
Wessen, Elias, Studier over spraket i Gustav Vasas Bibel’, Nysvenska studier 7 (1927),
pp. 251-63.
Westrin, T., ‘Nagra iakttagelser angaende franskan sasom diplomatiens sprak’,
Historisk Tidskrift 20 (1900), pp. 329-40.
Whinnom, Keith, 'Lingua Franca: Historical Problems’, in Albert Valdman (ed.),
Pidgin and Creole Linguistics (Bloomington, 1977), pp. 295-310.
Whitelocke, Bulstrode, A Journal of the Swedish Embassy, 2 vols. (London, 1855).
Wieruszowski, Helene, Politics and Culture in Medieval Spain and Italy (Rome,
## 1971).
Wilkins, John, Essay toward a Real Character and a Philosophical Language (London,
## 1668).
Willemyns, Roland, 'Religious Fundamentalism and Language Planning in
Nineteenth-Century Flanders’, IJGLSA 2 (1997), pp. 281-302.
Williams, Glyn, Sociolinguistics: a Sociological Critique (London, 1992).
Wilson, Duncan, The Life and Times ofVuk Stefanovic Karadzic (Oxford, 1970).
Wind, Bartina H., Les mots italiens introduits en frangais au i6e siecle (Deventer,
## 1926).
Winge, Vibeke, Ddnische Deutsche - deutsche Danen. Geschichte der deutschen
Sprache in Ddnemark 1300—1800 (Heidelberg, 1992).
Wis, Marjatta, Ricerche sopra gli italianismi nella lingua tedesca (Helsinki, 1955).
Withers, Charles W. J., Gaelic in Scotland, 1698—1981: the Geographical History of a
Language (Edinburgh, 1984).
Wolff, Hans, Der Purismus in der deutschen Literatur des siebzehnten Jhts (1888: repr.
## Leipzig, 1975).
Wolff, Philippe, Western Languages ad 100—1900 (London, 1971).
Wood, Michael T., 'Bernardo Aldrete and Celso Cittadini’, Hispanic Review 61
(i993). PP- 65-85-
Woodbine, George. E., 'The Language of English Law’, Speculum 18 (1943),
## PP- 395-436.
Woolard, Kathryn A., ‘Bernardo de Aldrete and the Morisco Problem’, Comparative
Studies in Society and History 44 (2002), pp. 446—80.
Wordsworth, William, Lyrical Ballads (London, 1798).
Wright, Roger, ‘Linguistic Standardization in the Middle Ages in the Iberian
Peninsula: Advantages and Disadvantages’, in Stewart Gregory and David
A. Trotter (eds.), De mot en mot (Cardiff, 1997), pp. 261-75.
Wrigley, E. Anthony, ‘A Simple Model of London’s Importance, 1650-1750’, Past
and Present 37 (1967), pp. 44-70.
Wuorinen, John H., Nationalism in Modern Finland (New York, 1931).
Zsirai, Miklos, ‘Samuel Gyarmathi, Hungarian Pioneer of Comparative Linguis¬
tics’ (1951: repr. Thomas Sebeok (ed.), Portraits of Linguists, 2 vols., Bloom¬
ington, 1966), vol. 1, pp. 58-70.

## Index
References to English, French, German, Italian and Spanish are omitted as they occur virtually passim.
Academies, linguistic, xii, xiii, xiv, 19, 90, 91, 98,
## 99, 100, 146, 150, 152, 153, 155, 157
## Accent, 33, 40-2, 67
Adam, language of, 21, 69
Adam of Usk (1377-1421), medieval Welsh
chronicler, 16
## Adelung, Johann Christoph (1732—1806),
German writer, 109
## Advertisements, 11
African-American English (AAE), 38,
## 126
African languages, 125
Agricola, Mikael (c. 1510—57), Finnish religious
reformer, 104
Albanian, xi, 79, 90,119
## Alberti, Leonbattista (1404—72), Italian
humanist, 95
Aldo, Aldus, see Manuzio
Aldrete, Bernardo de (1565—1645), Spanish canon
and scholar, xii, 21, 22, 29
## Alfonso X, ‘the Wise {el Sabio)’ (reigned
1252—84), King of Spain, 15, 63, 97
Alfred, King of England (849-99), 92
## Alphabets, 169
Amaseo, Romolo (1489-1552), Italian humanist,
## 55. 65
Anchieta, Jos6 de (1534—97), Portuguese Jesuit
missionary, 47, 92, 125
Anderson, Benedict (b. 1936), British political
scientist, 6, 166
Anglo-Saxon, 25, 92, 171
Anxiety of defecit, 17
Arabic, xi, 7, 24, 27, 48, 52, 76,112, 121, 123, 127,
## 135.154. 171
Aretino, Pietro (1492-1556), Italian writer, 31, 154
Arias Barbosa, sixteenth-century Spanish
humanist, 145
Ariosto, Ludovico (1474-1533), Italian poet, 37,
## 107
Arnim, Achim von (1781-1831), Prussian poet,
## 170
Arwidsson, Adolf (1791-1858), Finnish poet, 168
Ascham, Roger (1516-68), English humanist, 45
Atatiirk, Mustafa Kemal (1881-1938), modernizer
of Turkey, 169
Aubrey, John (1626—97), English antiquary, 41
Aventinus (Johann Thurmair, 1477—1534),
Bavarian humanist, 27, 120
## Aymara, 92,124
Bacon, Francis (1561—1626), English philosopher,
## 59
Baggioni, Daniel, French linguist, 9, 10
## Bakhtin, Mikhail Mikhailovich (1895-1975),
Russian linguistic and literary theorist, 4, 51,
## 62,109, 113,139, 159
Balassa, Balint (1554-94), Hungarian poet, 114
## Balbin, Bohuslav (1621-88), Czech
Jesuit, xiii, 66
Banchieri, Adriano (1568-1634), writer in
Bolognese, xii
Bare re, Bertrand (1755-1841), French
revolutionary, 165
Barnes, William (1801-86), English poet and
language reformer, 171
Barros, Joao de (1496-1570), Portuguese
humanist, xi, 28, 65, 66, 67, 125
Barrow, John, nineteenth-century English
traveller, 47
Bas-Lauriol law, 172
Basque, xi, 83, 90,104,124,127,134,135
## Bayle, Pierre (1647-1706), French Protestant
scholar, 59, 87
## Beams Rhenanus (1485-1547), German
humanist, 120
Beccaria, Gian Luigi, Italian linguist, 50
## Bellarmino, Roberto (1542-1621), Italian Jesuit,
## 37. 79
## 200

## Index
## 201
Belorusian, see Ruthenian
Bembo, Pietro (1470-1547), Italian language
reformer, x, 55, 95, 97-9, 144, 145, 154, 157
Beni, Paolo (1553-1625), Italian scholar, xii, 155
## Bergamask, 37, 135
## Bernegger, Matthias (1582-1640), German
professor and translator, 56
## Bertonio, Ludovico (1555-1628), Italian Jesuit
missionary, 92
## Berynda, Pamva (d. 1632), Ruthenian
monk-printer, 106
Betham, Peter (floruit c. 1543), Fellow of
## Peterhouse, 150
## Bethlen, Mikl6s (1642—1716), Hungarian
aristocrat, 78, 116,132
Beza, Theodore (1519—1605), French humanist
and Calvinist, 108, 133
Bibles, x, xi, xii, 79, 83, 84, 103-6,107,149
Bibliander (Buchmann, c. 1500-64), Theodor,
professor of Hebrew, 24
Bielski, Marcin (1495-1575), Polish chronicler, 8
## Biffi, Giovanni Ambrogio (d. 1672), Milanese
writer, xii, 66
## Biondi, Giovanni Francesco (1572—1644), Italian
historian, 116
Biondo, Flavio (1392—1463), Italian humanist,
## 20
Bloch, Marc (1886-1944), French historian, 9
Boccaccio, Giovanni (1314-75), Italian writer, 89,
## 98
Bodin, Jean (c. 1530-96), French political
thinker, 76
Bodmer, Johann Jakob (1698-1783), Swiss writer,
## 116
Bohoric, Adam (d. 1598), Slovene schoolmaster,
xii, 24
## Bolognese, 25, 36, 37, 135
## Borghini, Vincenzio (1515-80), Florentine
scholar-cleric, 20, 23, 24, 25
Boscan, Juan (c. 1487-1542), Catalan writing in
## Castilian, 84
Botero, Giovanni (1544-1617), Italian political
thinker, 22
## Bouhours, Dominique (1628-1702), French
Jesuit writer, 22, 24, 25, 27, 66, 67, 68
## Bourdieu, Pierre (1930-2002), French
sociologist, 32, 122, 157
## Bouvet, Joachim (1656-1730), French Jesuit
missionary, 21
Boyle, Robert (1627-91), English natural
philosopher, 78
Braudel, Fernand (1902-85), French historian, 9,
## 14
## Bredero, Gerbrand Adriaenszoon (1585—1618),
Dutch playwright, 39
## Brerewood, Edward (c. 1565-1613), English
writer on language, 23
Breton, x, xiii, 72, 82, 90, 135
Bridges, Robert (1844-1930), English poet, 172
Browne, Edward (1644-1708), English traveller,
## 47
Bruni, Leonardo (1370-1444), Tuscan humanist,
## 20, 27, 144
Brunot, Ferdinand (1860-1938), French historian
of language, 3, 62, 107
Bulgarian, xi, 123, 170
Bullokar, William, sixteenth-century English
spelling reformer, 96
Burckhardt, Jacob (1818—97), Swiss cultural
historian, 58
Busbecq, Ogier Ghislain de (1522-92), Flemish
diplomat, 118
Callfores, Franqois de (1645—1717), French
diplomat, xiii, 31,114
## Calmo, Andrea (c. 1510-71), Venetian
playwright, 30, 135
Calvet, Louis-Jean (b. 1942), French linguist, 70
Calvin, Jean (1509—64), French reformer, 78
Camden, William (1551-1623), English scholar, 21
## Campe, Joachim Heinrich (1746-1818), German
purist, 109, 171
Camus, Jean-Pierre (1584-1652), French bishop
and writer, 155
Caravia, Alessandro, sixteenth-century Venetian
goldsmith-poet, 30
Carew, Richard (1555-1620), English poet and
scholar, xii, 28, 65, 66
Cartier, Jacques (c. 1491-1557), French explorer,
## 26
Castellesi, Adriano, sixteenth-century Italian
cardinal, x, 20, 23
Castro, Amdrico (1885-1972), Spanish historian,
## 4
Catalan, x, 62, 63, 72, 84,104,119,135,163
Catherine 11, Empress of Russia (‘the Great’,
ruled 1762—96), 26, 69
Cawdrey, Robert, sixteenth-century English
dictionary maker, 84
Caxton, William (c. 1422-91), English printer,
## 106
Celtic languages (see Breton, Irish, Manx,
## Scottish Gaelic, Welsh), 10, 25
Centrifugal and centripetal tendencies, 13, 102,
## 109, 140
## Cernln, Graf Humprecht Jan,
seventeenth-century Czech nobleman, 85,
## 137
Certeau, Michel de (1925-86), French cultural
theorist, 4

## 202
## Index
Cervantes de Salazar, Francisco (c. 1514-c. 1575),
rector of the University of Mexico, 47
Cesarotti, Melchiorre (1730—1808), Italian writer,
## 120, 156, 164
Chaderton, Lawrence (1536-1640), Master of
## Emmanuel College, 142
## Chanceries, 10, 52, 63, 73, 93, 99, 101, 102, 103,
## 106, 136
Chapelain, Jean (1595-1674), French critic, 35
Chappelain, Genevieve, seventeenth-century
French translator, 116
Charlemagne (768-814), emperor, 72
Charles in, King of Spain (ruled 1759-88), xiv,
## 163
Charles v, emperor (ruled 1516-58), 28, 45
## Charpentier, Francois (1620—1702), French
writer, 66, 86
Chaucer, Geoffrey (c. 1340-1400), English poet,
## 15, 150
Cheke, John (1514-57), English humanist, 149,
## 158
## Chinese, 8, 21, 48, 59
Christian (Christiern) hi, King of Denmark
## (ruled 1534-59), 103
Church Slavonic, see Old Church Slavonic
Cicero, Marcus Tullius (106-43 BC)> Roman
writer and statesman, 57, 58, 144, 145
## Citolini, Alessandro (c. 1500-82), Italian
humanist, 66
Cittadini, Celso (1553-1627), Sienese poet and
scholar, xii, 21
Civilizing process, 89, no
Clarke, Samuel (1675-1729), disciple of Newton,
## 56
Clusius, Carolus (1526-1609), Flemish botanist,
## 114
Colbert, Jean-Baptiste (1619-83), French
minister, 76
Colet, John (c. 1467-1519), English humanist,
## 145
Colocci, Angelo (1474-1549), Italian humanist,
## 51
Comenius, see Komensky
## Communities, 5, 44, 49, 53, 54, 164, 166
## Congresses, 46, 86
Constance, Council of, 161
## Cordier, Mathurin (1479-1564), French
schoolmaster, 54
Corneille, Thomas (1625-1709), French writer,
## 141
Cornish, xiii, 25, 71
Correas, Gonzalo (c. 1571-1631), Spanish spelling
reformer, 96
Corsi, Pietro, sixteenth-century Florentine
humanist, 144
Cotgrave, Randle (d. 1634), English dictionary
maker, 36
## Coulton, George G. (1858-1947), British
historian, 62
Courcelles, Etienne de (1586-1659), French
pastor and translator, 56
Courts of law, 74, 75
Courts of princes, 99,100,127,128
Cranmer, Thomas (1489-1556), archbishop of
## Canterbury, 49
Creoles, creolization, ill, 126
Croat (see also Serbo-Croat), x, 90,105,118, 168
## Curonian, 70
Czech, x, xi, xii, xiv, 8, 16, 23, 62, 66, 74, 79, 80,
## 83, 90, 93, 95,102, 104,105, 150, 153
## Dalgarno, George (c. 1626-87), British
schoolmaster, 59
## Dalmatin, Antun (d. 1579), South Slav
translator, 105
Daniel, Samuel (c. 1562—1619), English poet, 19
Danish, x, xi, 8, 10, 39, 63, 66, 67, 90, 96, 103,
## 127, 128, 130,134, 136,146, 148, 151, 155, 162,
## 165, 168
Dante Alighieri (1265—1331), Florentine poet, x,
## 15, 65, 89, 106
Dead languages, 19, 98
Defecit, linguistic, 17
Defoe, Daniel (c. 1660—1731), English writer, 46,
## 100, 146
Dell, William, seventeenth-century English
divine, 17
De Mauro, Tullio, Italian linguist, 2,167
Derrida, Jacques (b. 1930), French philosopher,
## 12
## Descartes, Rene (1596-1650), French
philosopher, 56, 78
Desmarets, Henri, seventeenth-century French
pastor and translator, 56
## Dialect, 4, 23, 35-8, 97
## Diglossia, 7, 43, 72, 168
Diodati, Elio (1576-1661), Swiss lawyer and
translator, 56
Dobrovsky, Josef (1753-1829), codifier of Czech,
xiv, 106
## Dolet, Etienne (1509-46), French
scholar-printer, xi, 27, 106, 145
Douglas, Mary (b. 1921), English anthropologist,
## 146, 156
Drummond of Hawthornden, John (1585-1649),
Scottish poet, 134
Dryden, John (1631-1700), English poet, 23, 28,
## 89, 152
## Du Bartas, Guillaume Salluste (1544-90), French
poet, 137

## Index
## 203
Du Bellay, Joachim (1525-60), French poet, xi,
## 18,19, 27, 65, 66, 68, 89, 91
## Dubois, Jacques (1478-1555), French
physician-grammarian, 95
Dupleix, Scipion (1569-1661), French historian,
## 26, 155
Duret, Claude (c. 1570-1611), French lawyer, 24
Dutch, x, xii, 21, 39, 56, 62, 63, 66, 69, 71, 74, 81,
## 83, 90,101,104,113, 118,119, 126, 130, 134, 151,
## 168
Dutch East India Company (VOC), 73, 82
Eck, Johann (1486-1543), German theologian,
## 103
Eco, Umberto (b. 1932), Italian semiologist, 60,
## 113
Eden, Richard, sixteenth-century English
merchant and translator, 18, 79
Edward 1, King of England (ruled 1272—1307), 16
Egenolff, Johann Augustin the younger
(1683-1729), historian of language, xiii, 21, 151
Elias, Norbert (1897-1990), German sociologist,
## 89
Elizabeth r, Queen of England (ruled 1558—1603),
## 45. 75
## Elyot, Thomas (c. 1490-1546), English
humanist, 34, 64
Emmanuel Philibert (1528-80), Duke of Savoy,
## 74
Empires and languages, 20, 22, 64, 75, 81,152
## Erasmus, Desiderius (c. 1466—1536), Dutch
humanist, 33, 54, 55, 56, 58, 67, 80, 142,
## 154
Erik xiv, King of Sweden (ruled 1560—68), 113
Erlinger, Georg (c. 1485-1541), German printer,
## 103
## Esperanto, 60
## Estienne, Henri (1531—98), French
scholar-printer, xi, 40, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70,106,
## 120, 147, 157, 158
## Estienne, Robert (c. 1503—59), French
scholar-printer, xi, 99, 106
Estonian, xiii, 19, 78, 90
Etiemble, Rene (b. 1909), French intellectual,
## 172
Evelyn, John (1620-1706), English virtuoso, 96,
## 140,146
External explanations, 12
Fauchet, Claude (1530-1601), French lawyer and
scholar, xii, 20
Febvre, Lucien (1878-1956), French historian, 4,
## 91,131, 163
Feyerabend, Sigmund, sixteenth-century
German printer, 107
## Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814), German
philosopher, 164
Finnish, xii, xiii, 10, 25, 87, 104, 113, 119, 168, 170
## Fischart, Johann (c. 1546-90), German
translator and satirist, 68, 121, 149
Fishman, Joshua A., American linguist, 2
## Fixity, 58, 89-90
Flemish, see Dutch
Florio, John (c. 1553-1625), Italian-English
translator, 122
## Foglietta, Uberto (c. 1518-81), Genoese
humanist, 65
Folengo, Teofilo (1491-1544), Italian monk and
poet, 133
## Fonvizin, Denis Ivanovich (1745-92), Russian
writer, 136
Fortunio, Gianfrancesco, sixteenth-century
Italian grammarian, 95
Franck, Sebastian (1499-1542), German printer
and writer, 18, 106
Frederick n. King of Prussia (‘the Great’, ruled
## 1740-86), 87, 109
Fries, Laurentius (1491—1550), German physician,
## 76, 148
## Frisian, 71, 90,148
Furetifere, Antoine (1619-88), French novelist
and dictionary-maker, 31, 36, 155
Gaelic, see Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh,
Gaj, Ljudevit (1809-72), codifier of Croat,
## 168
## Galbraith, Vivian H. (1889-1976), British
historian, 4
## Galeani Napione, Gianfrancesco (1748-1830),
Italian writer, 164
## Galiani, Ferdinando (1728-87), Neapolitan
writer, xiv, 164
## Galician, 71
Galilei, Galileo (1564-1642), Italian natural
philosopher, 30, 55, 78
Gandavo, Pedro de Magalhaes de,
sixteenth-century Portuguese writer, 66
Gascon, see Proven9al
Gaulle, General Charles de (1890—1970), French
president, 172
## Gelli, Giambattista (1493-1563), Florentine
writer, 17
Gender, language and, 33
## Genovesi, Antonio (1712-69), Neapolitan
professor, 78
## Georgian, 48, 118
## Gerasimov, Dmitri (c. 1465—0. 1535), Russian
diplomat, 46, 53
Germain, Jean, sixteenth-century French lawyer
and poet, 134

## 204
## Index
Gerner, Henrik (1629-1700), Danish bishop,
## 100, 146
Gesner, Conrad, Swiss scholar (1516-65), 121,
## 144
## Giambullari, Pierfrancesco (1494-1555),
Florentine canon, 121
Gill, Alexander (1597-1642), English headmaster,
## 34, 36, 69
Ginzburg, Carlo (b. 1939), Italian historian,
## 17
## Glazemaker, Jan Hendrikszoon (c. 1620-82),
Dutch translator, 151
Goseken, Heinrich (d. 1705), pastor, author of
Estonian grammar, xiii
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1832),
German writer, 117
Goldoni, Carlo (1707-93), Venetian playwright,
## 39. 135
Gdmicki, Lukasz (1527-1603), Polish humanist,
## 83
## Goropius Becanus, Johannes (c. 1518-72),
Flemish humanist, 21, 69
Gothic language, 25, 70
## Gottsched, Johann Christoph (1700—66),
German critic, 32,109,151
Gozzi, Carlo (1720—1806), Venetian writer, 98,
## 153
## Grand Tour, 114
Granvelle, Antoine de Perrenot (1517-86),
cardinal and statesman, 117
## Gravina, Gianvicenzo (1664-1718), Neapolitan
scholar, 153
Greek, x, 20, 36, 48, 57, 90, 96, 119, 123, 134, 135,
## 144, 156, 158, 170
## Gregoire, Baptiste Henri (1750-1831), French
priest, revolutionary and language reformer,
xiv, 10, 38, 165
Guarini, Giambattista (1538-1612), Italian poet,
## 37
## Gueintz, Christian (1592—1660), German
superintendent of schools, 18, 150
## Guineo, 38
Gustav hi (ruled 1771-92), King of Sweden,
## 152
Gustav Vasa (ruled 1523—60), King of Sweden,
## 103
## Gutenberg, Johann (c. 1397-1468), German
printer, 10, 91
## Gyarmathi, Sdmuel (1751-1830), Hungarian
linguist, 25
## Gypsies, 38, 67
1 lackett, John, sixteenth-century English
ambassador, 113
Hall, Robert A. (b. 1911), American linguist, 2
## Hamann, Johann Georg (1730-88), German
writer, 117
Hare, John, seventeenth-century English radical,
## 152
Harington, John (1560-1612), English translator,
## 107
Hart, John, sixteenth-century English
orthographer, 96
Harvey, Gabriel (c. 1550-1631), English scholar,
## 96
Haugen, Einar (b. 1906), Norwegian linguist, 8
## Hebrew, 20, 21, 24, 52, 65, 121, 134, 144
Heere, Lucas de (c. 1534-84), Flemish painter,
## 119
## Heidegger, Martin (1889—1976), German
philosopher, 12
Heinsius, Nicolaas (1620-81), Dutch poet, 83
Heltai, Gdspar (Caspar Helth, d. 1574),
German-Hungarian printer, 105, 106
## Herder, Johann Gottfried (1744-1803), German
thinker, 117,164
## Heteroglossia, 4, 113,139, 159
## Heywood, Thomas (c. 1574-1641), English
playwright, 122
Hickes, George (1642-1715), English scholar, 25
Hobbes, Thomas (1588—1679), English political
theorist, 58
Hoby, Thomas (1530—66), English translator,
## 149
## Holberg, Ludvig (1684-1754), Scandinavian
playwright, 39, 152,155
## Holguin, Diego Gonzalez (c. 1552—c. 1617),
Spanish Jesuit missionary, 92
Horn, Frederik (1708—81), Danish writer, 151
Hosius, Stanislaus (1504-79), Polish archbishop,
## 43. 72
How, Samuel, seventeenth-century English
shoemaker, 17
Howell, James (c. 1594-1666), British writer, 28,
## 30, 96
Hungarian, x, xii, xiii, 25, 63, 66, 69, 80, 95, 105,
## 118, 119, 123, 130, 132
Hus, Jan (c. 1369-1415), Czech reformer, 16, 51,
## 83, 93, 104, 150
## Huygens, Constantijn (1596-1687), Dutch
scholar, ti6
Hymes, Dell, American linguist, 2
## Hypercorrectness, 100
Icelandic, xi, xiii, 23, 63, 66,104, 127, 149, 152
## Ickelsamer, Valentin (c. 1500-41), German
pastor, schoolmaster-grammarian, xi, 95, 148
Identity and language, 6
Innis, Harold (1894-1952), Canadian media
theorist, 94

## Index
## 205
Internal explanations, 12
Irish, xi, 63, 74, 75, 117
japan, Japanese, 48,123
## Jargon, 30, 35, 49, 57, 126
## Javanese, 121, 123
Jerome (c. 348—420), early Christian writer and
translator, 21, 33
## Jesuits, 37, 48, 92, 102, 124
Jews, 38, see also Hebrew, Yiddish
Johan m, King of Sweden (ruled 1568-92), 87,
## ‘49
John of Salisbury (c. 1115-80), English writer,
## 49
Johnson, Samuel (1709-84), English writer, xiii,
## 11, 34, 87, 100,146
Johnston, William, eighteenth-century English
dictionary maker, 108
Jones, Hugh (1669—1760), writer on grammar,
## 41. 90
Jones, Richard Foster (b. 1886), historian of
## English, 62
Jones, William (1726-1800), student of ancient
## India, 25
Jonson, Ben (c. 1573-1637), English playwright,
## 26, 33, 36, 134
Jonsson (Jonas), Arngrimur (1568-1648),
Icelandic scholar, xiii, 23, 152
Joseph 11, emperor, xiv
KaradziC Vuk Stefanovic (1787-1864), codifier
of Serbian, 168, 170
Karl xi, King of Sweden (ruled 1660—97), xiii,
## 27, 76, 162
Kasic, Bartol (1575-1650), author of South Slav
grammar, xii
Klein, Daniel (1609—66), author of Lithuanian
grammar, xiii
Klonowicz, Sebastian (1545—1602), Polish poet,
## 30
## Klopstock, Friedrich Gottlieb (1724-1803),
German poet, 28
Knapski (Rnapiusz), Gregorz (1564-1619), Polish
schoolmaster-lexicographer, 153
Kochanowski, Jan (1530-84), Polish poet, 72
## Koine, 97,101, 102,103,109
Kollar, J4n (1793-1852), codifier of Slovak, 168
## Komensk^, Jan Amos (1592-1670), Czech
educationalist, 119
Konzul, Stjepan (1521-79), South Slav translator,
## IOS
Kopitar, Jernej (1780-1844), codifier of Slovene,
## 168
Kopystens’ky, Zakhariya (d. 1627), monk from
## Kiev, 52
Korais, Adamantios (1788-1833), Greek language
reformer, 170
Koselleck, Reinhart (1923-), German historian,
## 163
Language culture, 1
Language competition, 70
Language consciousness, 2, 11; ch. 1, passim
Language death (cf. dead languages), 16, 70
Language domains, 7, 29, 71, 130, 131
Language encounters, in, 122
Language planning, 12, 157
Language policies, 72,160,163
Language wealth, 66
Lapp, see Sami
Lasso, Orlando (Roland de Lassus, c. 1530—94),
Netherlands composer, 137
Latin, 10, 17; ch. 2, passim-, 62, 86, 87, 144-5
## Latvian, 17, 71, 90
## Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646-1716),
German philosopher-polymath, 23, 25, 38, 66,
## 70, 81, 87,116, 131, 151, 155
Lengua general, 102, 124
Leon, fray Luis de (c. 1527-91), Spanish scholar
and poet, 29
Leopardi, Giacomo (1798-1837), Italian poet,
hi
Leopold 1 (ruled 1657-1705), emperor, 85, 113,
## ‘37
Le Roy, Louis (c. 1510-77), French humanist, 22,
## 24, 76
Lery, Jean de (1534-1611), French Protestant
missionary, 26
Lever, Ralph (d. 1585), English divine, 149
Lingua depreto, 38, 126
Lingua franca, 46, 54,126,127
Lingua geral, 102,124
## Lipsius, Justus (1547-1606), Netherlands
humanist, 57, 80
Lithuanian, xi, xiii, 71, 78, 90
Littleton, Thomas (d. 1481), English lawyer,
## 128
Llwyd, Edward (1660-1709), Welsh antiquarian,
## 15
Lodwick, Francis (1619-94), English merchant,
## 59
## Lomonosov, Mikhaylo Vasilevich (1711—65),
Russian writer, xiii, 69, 100, 154
Longueil, Christophe de (1488—1522),
Netherlands humanist, 145
L6pez de Velasco, Juan, Spanish writer on
language, 108
Louis xrv, King of France (ruled 1643-1715), 86
## Ludolf, Heinrich Wilhelm (1655-1710), German
scholar, xiii, 52, 133

## 20 6
## Index
Luther, Martin (1483-1546), German reformer, x,
## 12, 36, 51, 55, 68,102,107,120,131,142
## Macaronics, 50,133-8
Mackenzie, George (1669-1725), Scottish lawyer,
## 29
Magalotti, count Lorenzo (1637-1712), Tuscan
natural philosopher, 116
Maggi, Ottaviano, sixteenth-century Italian
diplomat, 115
## Malay, 123, 125
Malecki, Jan (also Sandecki, c. 1490-1567),
Polish printer and translator, 23, 106, 153
Malherbe, Francois de (1555-1628), French poet,
## 99, 100, 146
Mallarnfo, Sfophane (1842—98), French poet,
## 141
## Maltese, 112
Manuzio, Aldo (1449-1515), printer in Venice,
## 97, 106, 157
Manuzio, Paolo (1512-74), printer in Venice, 97,
## 106
Manx, xiii
Mareuil, Pierre de (d. 1742), French Jesuit
translator, 116
Martel, Antoine (1899—1931), French linguist, 3
Martin, Henri-Jean (b. 1924), French historian
of the book, 91
Masculine and feminine languages, 28
## Maunoir, Julien (1606-83), French Jesuit
missionary to Brittany, xiii
Media lengua, 112
Medici, Catherine de’ (1519—89), Queen of
## France, 85,137
Medici, Cosimo de’ (1519-74), Grand Duke of
## Tuscany, 98, 157
## Meigret, Louis (c. 1510-c. 1560), French
grammarian and spelling reformer, xi, 96
Meillet, Antoine (1866—1936), French linguist, 8,
## 9. 13
## Mexia, Pedro (c. 1496—c. 1552), Spanish
writer, 68
Migration, 39, too, 101, 112
Mil&n, Luis de, sixteenth-century Spanish
musician, 84
## Milanese, 36, 40, 66
## Missions, 92, 102, 103,124
Mitford, Nancy (1904-73), English socialite, 31
## Mohrmann, Christine (1903-88), Dutch
linguist, 3, 44
Molifere (1622-73), French playwright, n, 35
Molina, Alonso de (d. 1585), Spanish dictionary
maker, 92
Montaigne, Michel de (1533-92), French essayist,
## 28, 56
Morales, fray Ambrosio de (1513—91), Spanish
writer, xii, 18
More, Thomas (1478-1535), English humanist,
## 64, 68
Moryson, Fynes (1566-1630), English traveller,
## 118, 122, 162
## Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (1756-91), Austrian
composer, 137
## Miinzer, Thomas (c. 1490-1525), German
reformer, 51
## Mulcaster, Richard (c. 1530-1611), English
schoolmaster, 19, 53, 68
Mylius (van der Myle), Abraham (1563-1637),
Dutch scholar, 24
## Nahuatl, 92, 122,124
Napoleon (1769—1821), French emperor, 164
Neapolitan, xiii, xiv, 36, 37,135, 164
## Nebrija, Antonio (c. 1444-1522), Spanish
humanist, x, 20, 89, 95, 96, 97
## Neologisms, 13, 35, 58, 64,104,147
Newton, Isaac (1642—1727), English natural
philosopher, 56, 78
Noot, Jan van der (c. 1540-90), Antwerp
patrician, 118
## Norwegian, 10, 169,170
Nunes de Leao, Duarte (c. 1530-1608),
Portuguese official and scholar, xii, 21, 22, 23,
## 27, 29, 121
Occitan, see Provencal
Old Church Slavonic, x, 10, 48, 52, 65, 69, 90,
## 105,118, 131,133, 136, 170
## Old Norse, 149, 152
## Old Prussian, 71
Oliveira, Frei Fernao de (b. 1507), Portuguese
grammarian, xi, 95
## Opalinski, Krzysztof (c. 1610-c. 1656), Polish
satirist, 132, 153
Opitz, Martin (1597-1639), German poet, 65,
## 66, 68, 83
Optat, BeneS (d. 1559), Czech grammarian, xi,
## 83. 95
## Orthography, 95, 105
Oxenstierna, count Axel (1583-1654), chancellor
of Sweden, 45, 132
Palsgrave, John (d. 1554), English schoolmaster
and chaplain, x, 30
## Paracelsus, Philippus (1493—1541), German
alchemist and physician, 77
## Pasek, Jan Chryzostom (c. 1636-c. 1701), Polish
gentleman, 132
Pasquier, Etienne (1529-1615), French lawyer and
scholar, 20, 27, 28

## Index
## 207
Patin, Guy (1601—72), French physician, 133
Patois, see dialect
Peek, George (1556-96), English poet, 19
Peiresc, Nicholas-Claude Fabri de (1580-1637),
French polymath, 87, 116,127
Peletier du Mans, Jacques (1517-82), French
poet, 27, 96, 108
Pentreath, Dolly (d. 1777), last speaker of
## Cornish, 71
Pepys, Samuel (1603-73), English diarist, 33
Perion, Joachim (c. 1499-1559), French monk
and professor, xi, 20
## Perkins, William (1558-1602), English
divine, 80
Perrott, Sir John (c. 1527-92), President of
## Munster, 75
## Persian, 123, 154, 171
Peter 1, Tsar of Russia (‘the Great’, ruled
## 1682-1725), 96, 130, 169
## Petraeus, Eskil (1593—1657), Finnish
bishop, 104
Petrarch (Francesco Petrarca, 1307—74), Italian
writer, 98
Philip 11, King of Spain (ruled 1556-98), xi, 142
Picard, Jean, sixteenth-century writer on French,
## 21
Picchio, Renato (b. 1923), Italian linguist, 9
Pidgins, pidginization, 47, in, 127
## Pietists, 32
## Pigafetta, Antonio (c. 1480-c. 1534), Italian
traveller, 26
## Plays, 11, 30, 33, 36, 126, 134,155
Plowden, Edmund (1518-85), English lawyer,
## 128
## Polabian, 71
Polish, x, xi, xiii, 16,18, 23, 53, 63, 66, 68, 72, 74,
## 75, 80, 83, 90,105, 130, 132,153
## Polyglossia, 4,113
## Polyphony, 113, 137
## Pontano, Giovanni Gioviano (1426-1503), Italian
humanist, 26
Pontoppidan, Erik (1698-1764), Danish bishop
and linguist, xii
Popovsky, Nikolai (c. 1730-1760), lecturer at
## Moscow University, 78
Portuguese, x, xiv, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30,
## 62, 66, 81, 90, 95, 121, 123, 124, 125,126,
## 127,166
## Postel, Guillaume (1500-81), French Orientalist,
## 20, 24
Pragmatics, historical, 3
Printing, printers, 91, 93,106—8, 157
## Pronunciation, 108
Provencal, x, 28, 63, 79, 82, 84, 135,
## 137
Pujades, Jeroni (1568-1635), Catalan chronicler,
## 84
Pulci, Luigi (1432—84), Florentine poet, 30
## Punctuation, 96
Puttenham, George (d. 1590), English lawyer
and critic, 41, 100
## Quakers, 32
## Quechua, 92, 102,112, 122, 124, 165
Questione della lingua, 9, 94
Quevedo Villegas, Francisco de (1580—1645),
Spanish writer, 34
Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintilianus,
c. 35—c. 100), Roman writer on oratory, 144
## Rabelais, Francois (c. 1494—c. 1553), French
writer, 134
## Raleigh, Sir Walter (c. 1552-1618), English
courtier, writer and explorer, 41
Rambouillet, Cathereine de Vivonne, marquise
de (1588-1665), seventeenth-century French
noblewoman, 35, 100
Ray, John (1627-1705), English botanist and
linguist, xiii, 11, 37
Rebuffi, Pierre (1487-1557), French lawyer, 73
Rehehusen, author of Latvian grammar, xii
Religion, language and, 32, 78
## Renaudot, Theophraste (1586-1653), French
journalist, 77
## Reuchlin, Johann (1455-1522), German
humanist, 145
## Rhys, John David (1534-1609), Welsh
grammarian, xii, 108
## Ribeiro Chiado, Antdnio (c. 1520-91),
Portuguese playwright, 126
Ribinyi, Jinos (1722-88), Hungarian writer on
language, xiii, 66, 69
Richard, Jean, sixteenth-century French lawyer
and poet, 134
Richelet, Pierre (1626-98), French dictionary
maker, 11
## Richelieu, Armand, Cardinal (1585-1642),
French statesman, 86, 99, 157
Richey, Michael (1678-1761), writer on
Hamburg dialect, xiii
Rist, Johann (1607-67), German poet, xii, 65,
## 66,150
Rivarol, Antoine (1753-1801), French journalist,
xiv, 28, 88, 90, 164
Roberts, Michael (1908-1996), British historian,
## 87
Robinson, Robert, seventeenth-century English
writer on language, 108
Robles, Juan de (1575-1639), Spanish writer, 19
Rocca, Angelo (1545-1620), Italian priest, 20

## 208
## Index
Romanian, xi, 78, 90, 106, 119
Romansh, xi, 63, 78, 90, 104,117
Rosa, VAclav (c. 1620-89), Czech grammarian,
## 153
Ross, AJan (b. 1907), English linguist, 31
Rotundus, Augustin, burgomaster of Wilno
(Vilnius), 53
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1712-78), Swiss-French
thinker, 32
Rubens, Peter Paul (1577-1640), Flemish painter,
## 118, 127
Rudbeck, Olaf (1630-1702), Swedish polymath,
xiii, 21, 69, 77
Russian, xii, xiii, xiv, 52, 66, 69, 78, 90, 96, too,
## 118, 130, 136, 140, 154, 170
## Ruthenian, 130
Ruzzante (Angelo Beolco, c. 1502-42), Venetian
playwright, 30
Rybinski, Jacob (c. 1560-c. 1600), teacher in
Torun, xii, 65, 66
Saint-Evremond, Charles de (1613-1703), French
writer, xii, 155
Saint-Simon, Louis, Due de (1675—1755), French
courtier, 34
Sajnovics, Janos (1733-85), Flungarian scholar, 25
Salons, 35, ioo
## Salviati, Lionardo (1540-89), Florentine
humanist, 66
Sami, xiii, 25, 78, 90
Sandecki, see Malecki
Sandys, Edwin (1561—1642), English Member of
## Parliament, 132
## Sanskrit, 25
## Sardinian, 37, 119
Saumaise, Claude de (Salmasius, 1588-1653),
French humanist, 20, 144
Scaglione, Aldo, Italian-American linguist, 9
## Schlegel, Friedrich (1772-1829), German
philosopher, 164
Schottel, Justus Georg (1612-76), xiii, 65, 151
Schrijnen, Josef (1869-1938), Dutch linguist, 3
## Schupp, Johann Baltasar (1610-61), German
writer, 76
Schwab, Johann-Christoph (1743-1821), German
writer on French, 88
Scottish Gaelic, xi, 75, 82
## Seklucjan, Jan (c. 1510-70), Polish Protestant
writer, 27, 100
## Serbian, 123, 168, 170
Serbo-Croat, 8, 168
## Shakespeare, William (1564-1616), English
dramatist, 13, 36, 64
Sheridan, Thomas (1719-88), Irish actor and
teacher of elocution, 41, 108
Siennik, Marcin, sixteenth-century Polish writer,
## 68
## Sigonio, Carlo (c. 1523-84), Modenese
humanist, 65
## Simons, Menno (1496-1561), Dutch Anabaptist,
## 142
Skautrup, Peter (1896-1982), Danish linguist, 3,
## 102
Skippon, Philip, seventeenth-century English
traveller, n, 37
Slavonic, see Old Church Slavonic
## Slovak, 79,102, 119,168
Slovene, xi, xii, 24, 63, 78, 90, 105, 119, 168
## Smotrickii, Meletios (c. 1578-1633), Ruthenian
cleric and grammarian, xii
Social history of language, 3
## Sociolects, 29
## Sociolinguistics, 2, 6, 17, 26, 100
Solorzano y Pereira, Juan de (1575—1655), Spanish
jurist, 81
## Sorb, 79, 90, 102, 105
Speech domain, 7, 29, 71
Spenser, Edmund (c. 1552—99), English poet, 75,
## 162
Sperling, Otto (1634-1715), Danish antiquary,
xiii, 66
Speroni, Sperone (1500-88), Italian rhetorician,
xi, 19, 27, 40, 55, 65, 66, 91
## Spieghel, Hendrik L. (1549—1610), Dutch
patrician and humanist, xii, 18, 39, 66, 120,
## 148
Sprat, Thomas (1625-1713), English bishop, 100,
## 152
## Stanyhurst, Richard (1547-1618), English
chronicler, 117
Statorius, Peter (d. 1591), French author of a
Polish grammar, xi, 83
Stefan, Simeon, seventeenth-century
metropolitan of Transylvania, 106
Steinberg, Sigfrid (1899-1969), historian of
printing, 91
Sten, Hans Christensen, sixteenth-century
Danish playwright, 136
## Stevin, Simon (1548-1620), Flemish
mathematician, xii, 22, 65, 66, 83, 148
Stiernhielm, Georg (1598-1672), Swedish poet,
xii, 22, 23, 25, 66,152
Stur, L’udovit (1815-56), codifier of Slovak,
## 168
## Sumarokov, Alexander P. (1718-77), Russian
writer, 154
Swedish, x, xi, xiii, 21, 23, 25, 38, 59, 66, 69, 76,
## 77, 90, 119, 127, 128, 130, 132, 149, 152, 162
Swift, Jonathan (1667-1745), British writer, 23,
## 34. 90

## Index
## 209
## Sylvester, Jdnos (c. 1504-c. 1555), Hungarian
translator, xi, 95
Sylvius, see Dubois
## Szymonowid, Szymon (1558-1629), Polish
poet, 18
## Tacitus, Cornelius (c. 57-c. 120), Roman
historian, 57
## Tagalog, 92
Tahureau, Jacques, sixteenth-century French
writer, 66
## Taino, 123
Tasso, Torquato (1544-95), Italian poet, 37
## Thomasius, Christian (1655—1728), German
professor, xiii, 77, 150
## Thorlaksson, Gudbrandur (1542-1627),
Icelandic scholar, 66
Thurmair, tee Aventinus
Timoneda, Juan (d. 1583), Spanish writer, 135
## Tindale, William (1492-1536), English Protestant
translator, 68, 104
Tolomei, Claudio (1492—1555), Sienese humanist,
xi, 18, 22, 144
Tompson, John, eighteenth-century professor of
## English, 117
Torres Naharro, Bartolome de, sixteenth-century
Spanish playwright, 136
Tory, Geoffroy (c. 1480—c. 1533), French printer,
x, 33,106
Toubon law, 172
## Translation, 79
## Travellers, 37, 47,118, 162
## Trediakovsky, Vasily K. (1703-69), Russian
writer, xiii, 66, 69, 91
Trent, Council of, 48, 51, 52, 79, 98
## Trissino, Gian Giorgio (1478-1550), Venetian
nobleman, poet and scholar, x, 96
## Trubar, Primoz (1508-86), Slovene Protestant
reformer, 105
## Tupl, 26, 92, 102, 122, 124, 125
Turkish, xiii, 114, 115, 122,123, 135, 154, 170
U and non-U, 31
Uchanski, Jakub (1502-81), Polish bishop,
## 43
Ukrainian, see Ruthenian
Universal languages, 59
## Universities, 54, 76, 114
Urbanization of language, 101
Utenhove, Jan (d. 1565), Dutch translator, 104
Utenhove, Karel (1536-1600), Flemish patrician,
## 118
Vald6s, Juan de (c. 1500-41), Spanish humanist,
## 97, 121
Valla, Lorenzo (1407-57), Roman humanist, 20
Varchi, Benedetto (1503-65), Florentine critic,
xi, 20, 99
Vargas y Ponce, Jos6 (1760-1821), writer on
Spanish, xiv, 30
Varro, Marcus Terentius (116-27 bc), Roman
scholar, 20
Vaugelas, Claude Favre, seigneur de (1585-1650),
French writer on language, xiii, 12, 30, 31, 35,
68, 91, 99, 100, no, 146,155
Vizquez de Espinosa, Antonio (d. 1630),
## Spanish Carmelite, 26
## Veblen, Thorstein (1857—1929), American
sociologist, 32
Vega Carpio, Lope de (1562-1635), Spanish
playwright, 135,136
## Venetian, 36, 37, 39, 40, 50, 127, 135
Venier, Matteo or Maffeo (1550—86), Venetian
patrician and poet, 155
Vergara, Juan de, sixteenth-century Spanish
humanist, 134
## Vergerio, Pier Paolo, Junior (1498-1565), Italian
Protestant humanist, 105
Veronese, Paolo (1528-88), Italian painter, 44
## Verstegan, Richard (floruit 1565-1620), English
Catholic scholar, 21, 150
## Vicente, Gil (c. 1470—c. 1536), Portuguese
playwright, 30, 135
Vidakovic, Milovan (1780-1842), codifier of
## Serbian, 168
## Villalon, Cristobal (c. 1500-58), Spanish
humanist, 89
Villers-Cotterets, edict or ordinance of, xi, 73
## Villon, Franyois (b. 1431), 30
## Vinogradov, Vladimir Alekseevich (b. 1921),
Russian linguist, 3, 140
Viziana, Martin de [Marti de Viciana],
Valencian writer, xi, 29, 65, 66, 121
Voltaire (Francois Marie Arouet, 1694-1778),
French philosophe, 28, 155
## Vysenskyi, Ivan (c. 1545—c. 1620), Orthodox
cleric, 65
Walker, John (1732-1807), English dictionary
maker, 108
Wallenstein, Albrecht von (1583-1634),
Czech-German general, t30, 131
Webb, John (1611-72), English architect, 21,
## 152
## Webster, Noah (1758-1843), American
dictionary-maker, 165
Weckherlin, Georg (1584-1653), German poet,
## 116, 150
Welsh, x, xi, xii, 16, 67, 69, 71, 78, 82, 90, 91,
## 105, 117

## 210
## Index
Werve, Jan van de, sixteenth-century Flemish
merchant, xi, 148
Wesley, John (1703-91), founder of Methodism,
## 54
Whig history, 61, 73, 167
Whitelocke, Bulstrode (1605-75), English envoy
to Sweden, 46
## Whorf, Benjamin L. (1897-1941), American
linguist, 166
## Wietor, Hieronim (c. 1480-c. 1547), Polish
printer, 68,106
Wilkins, John (1614-72), English divine, 24, 59
Wilson, Thomas (c. 1525-81), English writer on
rhetoric, 149
## Winstanley, Gerrard (1609-76), English
radical, 17
## Wolff, Christian (1679-1754), German
philosopher, 77
Women and language, 33-5, 49, 100, 146, 159
## Wordsworth, William (1770-1850), English
poet, 170
Wydif, John (c. 1328-84), English reformer,
## 104
Yiddish, xi, 118, 121
Zefarovic, Christophor, eighteenth-century
Bulgarian monk, 53
Zesen, Philipp von (1619-89), German writer,
## 151
Zizanij, Lavrentii, sixteenth-century Ukrainian
dictionary maker, xii







## DATE DUE



In this magisterial new study, Peter Burke explores the
social and cultural history of the languages spoken or written
in Europe between the invention of printing and the French
Revolution, arguing that, from a linguistic point of view,
1450 to 1789 should be regarded as a discrete period.
One major theme of the book is the relation between
languages and communities (regions, churches, occupations
and genders as well as nations) and the place of language as
a way of identifying others as well as a symbol of one’s own
identity. A second, linked theme is that of competition:
between Latin and the vernaculars, between different
vernaculars - dominant and subordinate - and finally
between different varieties of the same vernacular, such
as standard languages and dialects.
Written by one of Europe’s leading cultural historians,
this book replaces the history of the many languages of
Europe in a large variety of contexts.
PETER burke is Professor of Cultural History and a
Fellow of Emmanuel College at the University of Cambridge.
He has published over twenty books which have been
translated into more than thirty languages.
cover illustration: Watteau, La Conversation,
c. 1712-13, canvas, Toledo Museum of Art,
## Toledo, Ohio.
## DESIGNED BY JACKIE TAYLOR
## Cambridge
## UNIVERSITY PRESS
www.cambridge.org
## ISBN 0-521-53586-7
